
9-106


G-1

Glossary

Aborted takeoff. A takeoff that is terminated prematurely 
when it is determined that some condition exists that makes 
takeoff or further flight dangerous.

Absolute pressure. Pressure measured from zero pressure 
or a vacuum.

Absolute pressure regulator. A valve used in a pneumatic 
system at the pump inlet to regulate the compressor inlet 
air pressure to prevent excessive speed variation and/or 
overspeeding of the compressor.

Absolute zero. The point at which all molecular motion 
ceases. Absolute zero is –460 °F and –273 °C.

Accumulator. A hydraulic component that consists of two 
compartments separated by a movable component, such as 
a piston, diaphragm, or bladder. One compartment is filled 
with compressed air or nitrogen, and the other is filled with 
hydraulic fluid and is connected into the system pressure 
manifold. An accumulator allows an incompressible fluid 
to be stored under pressure by the force produced by a 
compressible fluid. Its primary purposes are to act as a shock 
absorber in the system, and to provide a source of additional 
hydraulic power when heavy demands are placed on the 
system.

Actuator. A fluid power device that changes fluid pressure 
into mechanical motion.

ADC. Air data computer.

ADF. Automatic direction finder.

ADI. Attitude director indicator.

Advancing blade. The blade on a helicopter rotor whose 
tip is moving in the same direction the helicopter is moving.

Adverse yaw. A condition of flight at the beginning of a 
turn in which the nose of an airplane momentarily yaws in 
the opposite direction from the direction in which the turn 
is to be made. 

Aerodynamic drag. The total resistance to the movement of 
an object through the air. Aerodynamic drag is composed of 
both induced drag and parasite drag. See induced drag and 
parasite drag.

Aerodynamic lift. The force produced by air moving over 
a specially shaped surface called an airfoil. Aerodynamic 
lift acts in a direction perpendicular to the direction the air 
is moving.

Aeronautical Radio Incorporated (ARINC). A corporation 
whose principal stockholders are the airlines. Its function is 
to operate certain communication links between airliners 
in flight and the airline ground facilities. ARINC also sets 
standards for communication equipment used by the airlines.

Aging. A change in the characteristics of a material with time. 
Certain aluminum alloys do not have their full strength when 
they are first removed from the quench bath after they have 
been heat-treated, but they gain this strength after a few days 
by the natural process of aging.

Agonic line. A line drawn on an aeronautical chart along 
which there is no angular difference between the magnetic 
and geographic north poles.

Air carrier. An organization or person involved in 
the business of transporting people or cargo by air for 
compensation or hire.

Air-cycle cooling system. A system for cooling the air in 
the cabin of a turbojet-powered aircraft. Compressor bleed 
air passes through two heat exchangers where it gives up 
some of its heat; then, it drives an expansion turbine where 
it loses still more of its heat energy as the turbine drives a 
compressor. When the air leaves the turbine, it expands and 
its pressure and temperature are both low.


 G-2

Aircraft communication addressing and reporting system 
(ACARS). A two-way communication link between an 
airliner in flight and the airline’s main ground facilities. Data 
is collected in the aircraft by digital sensors and is transmitted 
to the ground facilities. Replies from the ground may be 
printed out so the appropriate flight crewmember can have 
a hard copy of the response. 

Airfoil. Any surface designed to obtain a useful reaction, or 
lift, from air passing over it.

Airspeed indicator. A flight instrument that measures the 
pressure differential between the pitot, or ram, air pressure, 
and the static pressure of the air surrounding the aircraft. 
This differential pressure is shown in units of miles per hour, 
knots, or kilometers per hour.

Airworthiness Directive (AD note). Airworthiness 
Directives (ADs) are legally enforceable rules issued by the 
FAA in accordance with 14 CFR part 39 to correct an unsafe 
condition in a product. 14 CFR part 39 defines a product as 
an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, or appliance.

Alclad. A registered trade name for clad aluminum alloy. 

Alodine. The registered trade name for a popular conversion 
coating chemical used to produce a hard, airtight, oxide film 
on aluminum alloy for corrosion protection.

Alphanumeric symbols. Symbols made up of all of the 
letters in our alphabet, numerals, punctuation marks, and 
certain other special symbols.

Alternator. An electrical generator that produces alternating 
current. The popular DC alternator used on light aircraft 
produces three-phase AC in its stator windings. This AC is 
changed into DC by a six-diode, solid-state rectifier before 
it leaves the alternator.

Altimeter setting. The barometric pressure at a given 
location corrected to mean (average) sea level.

Altitude engine. A reciprocating engine whose rated sea-level 
takeoff power can be produced to an established higher altitude.

Alumel. An alloy of nickel, aluminum, manganese, and 
silicon that is the negative element in a thermocouple used 
to measure exhaust gas temperature.

Ambient pressure. The pressure of the air surrounding a 
person or an object.

Ambient temperature. The temperature of the air 
surrounding a person or an object.

American wire gauge. The system of measurement of wire 
size used in aircraft electrical systems.

Amphibian. An airplane with landing gear that allows it to 
operate from both water and land surfaces. 

Amplifier. An electronic circuit in which a small change in 
voltage or current controls a much larger change in voltage 
or current.

Analog electronics. Electronics in which values change in 
a linear fashion. Output values vary in direct relationship to 
changes of input values.

Analog-type indicator. An electrical meter that indicates 
values by the amount a pointer moves across a graduated 
numerical scale.

Aneroid. The sensitive component in an altimeter or 
barometer that measures the absolute pressure of the air. The 
aneroid is a sealed, flat capsule made of thin corrugated disks 
of metal soldered together and evacuated by pumping all of 
the air out of it. Evacuating the aneroid allows it to expand 
or collapse as the air pressure on the outside changes.

Angle of attack. The acute angle formed between the chord 
line of an airfoil and the direction of the air that strikes the 
airfoil.

Angle of attack indicator. An instrument that measures the 
angle between the local airflow around the direction detector 
and the fuselage reference plane.

Angle of incidence. The acute angle formed between the 
chord line of an airfoil and the longitudinal axis of the aircraft 
on which it is mounted.

Annual rings. The rings that appear in the end of a log cut 
from a tree. The number of annual rings per inch gives an 
indication of the strength of the wood. The more rings there 
are and the closer they are together, the stronger the wood. 
The pattern of alternating light and dark rings is caused by 
the seasonal variations in the growth rate of the tree. A tree 
grows quickly in the spring and produces the light-colored, 
less dense rings. The slower growth during the summer, or 
latter part of the growing season, produces the dark-colored, 
denser rings.


G-3

Annunciator panel. A panel of warning lights in plain sight 
of the pilot. These lights are identified by the name of the 
system they represent and are usually covered with colored 
lenses to show the meaning of the condition they announce.

Anodizing. The electrolytic process in which a hard, airtight, 
oxide film is deposited on aluminum alloy for corrosion 
protection.

Antenna. A special device used with electronic 
communication and navigation systems to radiate and receive 
electromagnetic energy.

Anti-ice system. A system that prevents the formation of ice 
on an aircraft structure.

Anti-icing additive. A chemical added to the turbine-engine 
fuel used in some aircraft. This additive mixes with water that 
condenses from the fuel and lowers its freezing temperature 
so it will not freeze and block the fuel filters. It also acts as 
a biocidal agent and prevents the formation of microbial 
contamination in the tanks.

Antidrag wire. A structural wire inside a Pratt truss airplane 
wing between the spars. Antidrag wires run from the rear spar 
inboard, to the front spar at the next bay outboard. Antidrag 
wires oppose the forces that try to pull the wing forward.

Antiservo tab. A tab installed on the trailing edge of a 
stabilator to make it less sensitive. The tab automatically 
moves in the same direction as the stabilator to produce an 
aerodynamic force that tries to bring the surface back to a 
streamline position. This tab is also called an antibalance tab.

Antiskid brake system. An electrohydraulic system in an 
airplane’s power brake system that senses the deceleration rate 
of every main landing gear wheel. If any wheel decelerates 
too rapidly, indicating an impending skid, pressure to that 
brake is released and the wheel stops decelerating. Pressure 
is then reapplied at a slightly lower value.

Antitear strip. Strips of aircraft fabric laid under the 
reinforcing tape before the fabric is stitched to an aircraft wing.

Arbor press. A press with either a mechanically or 
hydraulically operated ram used in a maintenance shop for 
a variety of pressing functions.

Arcing. Sparking between a commutator and brush or 
between switch contacts that is caused by induced current 
when a circuit is broken.

Area. The number of square units in a surface. 

Aspect ratio. The ratio of the length, or span, of an airplane 
wing to its width, or chord. For a nonrectangular wing, the 
aspect ratio is found by dividing the square of the span of the 
wing by its area. Aspect Ratio = span2 ÷ area.

Asymmetrical airfoil. An airfoil section that is not the same 
on both sides of the chord line.

Asymmetrical lift. A condition of uneven lift produced by 
the rotor when a helicopter is in forward flight. Asymmetrical 
lift is caused by the difference between the airspeed of the 
advancing blade and that of the retreating blade.

Attenuate. To weaken, or lessen the intensity of, an activity.

Attitude indicator. A gyroscopic flight instrument that gives 
the pilot an indication of the attitude of the aircraft relative to 
its pitch and roll axes. The attitude indicator in an autopilot 
is in the sensing system that detects deviation from a level-
flight attitude.

Augmenter tube. A long, stainless steel tube around the 
discharge of the exhaust pipes of a reciprocating engine. 
Exhaust gases flow through the augmenter tube and produce 
a low pressure that pulls additional cooling air through the 
engine compartment. Heat may be taken from the augmenter 
tubes and directed through the leading edges of the wings 
for thermal anti-icing.

Autoclave. A pressure vessel inside of which air can be 
heated to a high temperature and pressure raised to a high 
value. Autoclaves are used in the composite manufacturing 
industry to apply heat and pressure for curing resins.

Autogyro. A heavier-than-air rotor-wing aircraft sustained 
in the air by rotors turned by aerodynamic forces rather than 
by engine power. When the name Autogyro is spelled with 
a capital A, it refers to a specific series of machines built by 
Juan de la Cierva or his successors.

Autoignition system. A system on a turbine engine that 
automatically energizes the igniters to provide a relight if 
the engine should flame out.

Automatic adjuster. A subsystem in an aircraft disk brake 
that compensates for disk or lining wear. Each time the brakes 
are applied, the automatic adjuster is reset for zero clearance, 
and when the brakes are released, the clearance between the 
disks or the disk and lining is returned to a preset value. A 
malfunctioning automatic adjuster in a multiple-disk brake 
can cause sluggish and jerky operation.


 G-4

Automatic flight control system (AFCS). The full system 
of automatic flight control that includes the autopilot, flight 
director, horizontal situation indicator, air data sensors, and 
other avionics inputs.

Automatic pilot (autopilot). An automatic flight control 
device that controls an aircraft about one or more of its three 
axes. The primary purpose of an autopilot is to relieve the 
pilot of the control of the aircraft during long periods of flight.

Autosyn system. A synchro system used in remote indicating 
instruments. The rotors in an Autosyn system are two-pole 
electromagnets, and the stators are delta-connected, three-phase, 
distributed-pole windings in the stator housings. The rotors in 
the transmitters and indicators are connected in parallel and 
are excited with 26-volt, 400-Hz AC. The rotor in the indicator 
follows the movement of the rotor in the transmitter.

Auxiliary power unit (APU). A small turbine or reciprocating 
engine that drives a generator, hydraulic pump, and air pump. 
The APU is installed in the aircraft and is used to supply 
electrical power, compressed air, and hydraulic pressure 
when the main engines are not running.

Aviation snips. Compound-action hand shears used for 
cutting sheet metal. Aviation snips come in sets of three. One 
pair cuts to the left, one pair cuts to the right, and the third 
pair of snips cuts straight.

Aviator’s oxygen. Oxygen that has had almost all of the 
water and water vapor removed from it.

Avionics. The branch of technology that deals with the 
design, production, installation, use, and servicing of 
electronic equipment mounted in aircraft.

Azimuth. A horizontal angular distance, measured clockwise 
from a fixed reference direction to an object.

Back course. The reciprocal of the localizer course for an 
ILS (Instrument Landing System). When flying a back-course 
approach, the aircraft approaches the instrument runway from 
the end on which the localizer antennas are installed.

Backhand welding. Welding in which the torch is pointed 
away from the direction the weld is progressing.

Backplate (brake component). A floating plate on which the 
wheel cylinder and the brake shoes attach on an energizing-
type brake.

Backup ring. A flat leather or Teflon ring installed in the 
groove in which an O-ring or T-seal is placed. The backup 
ring is on the side of the seal away from the pressure, and it 
prevents the pressure extruding the seal between the piston 
and the cylinder wall.

Balance cable. A cable in the aileron system of an airplane 
that connects to one side of each aileron. When the control 
wheel is rotated, a cable from the cockpit pulls one aileron 
down and relaxes the cable going to the other aileron. The 
balance cable pulls the other aileron up.

Balance panel. A flat panel hinged to the leading edge of 
some ailerons that produces a force which assists the pilot 
in holding the ailerons deflected. The balance panel divides 
a chamber ahead of the aileron in such a way that when the 
aileron is deflected downward, for example, air flowing 
over its top surface produces a low pressure that acts on the 
balance panel and causes it to apply an upward force to the 
aileron leading edge.

Balance tab. An adjustable tab mounted on the trailing edge 
of a control surface to produce a force that aids the pilot in 
moving the surface. The tab is automatically actuated in such 
a way it moves in the direction opposite to the direction the 
control surface on which it is mounted moves.

Balanced actuator. A linear hydraulic or pneumatic actuator 
that has the same area on each side of the piston.

Banana oil. Nitrocellulose dissolved in amyl acetate, so 
named because it smells like bananas.

Bank (verb). The act of rotating an aircraft about its 
longitudinal axis.

Barometric scale. A small window in the dial of a sensitive 
altimeter in which the pilot sets the barometric pressure level 
from which the altitude shown on the altimeter is measured. 
This window is sometimes called the “Kollsman” window.
base. The electrode of a bipolar transistor between the emitter 
and the collector. Varying a small flow of electrons moving 
into or out of the base controls a much larger flow of electron 
between the emitter and the collector.

Base. The electrode of a bipolar transistor between the emitter 
and the collector. Varying a small flow of electrons moving 
into or out of the base controls a much larger flow of electrons 
between the emitter and the collector.

Bead (tire component). The high-strength carbon-steel wire 
bundles that give an aircraft tire its strength and stiffness 
where it mounts on the wheel.


G-5

Bead seat area. The flat surface on the inside of the rim of 
an aircraft wheel on which the bead of the tire seats.

Bearing strength (sheet metal characteristic). The amount 
of pull needed to cause a piece of sheet metal to tear at the 
points at which it is held together with rivets. The bearing 
strength of a material is affected by both its thickness and 
the diameter of the rivet.

Beehive spring. A hardened-steel, coil-spring retainer used 
to hold a rivet set in a pneumatic rivet gun. This spring gets 
its name from its shape. It screws onto the end of the rivet 
gun and allows the set to move back and forth, but prevents 
it being driven from the gun.

Bend allowance. The amount of material actually used 
to make a bend in a piece of sheet metal. Bend allowance 
depends upon the thickness of the metal and the radius of 
the bend, and is normally found in a bend allowance chart.

Bend radius. The radius of the inside of a bend.

Bend tangent line. A line made in a sheet metal layout that 
indicates the point at which the bend starts.

Bernoulli’s principle. The basic principle that explains 
the relation between kinetic energy and potential energy in 
fluids that are in motion. When the total energy in a column 
of moving fluid remains constant, any increase in the kinetic 
energy of the fluid (its velocity) results in a corresponding 
decrease in its potential energy (its pressure).

Bezel. The rim that holds the glass cover in the case of an 
aircraft instrument.

Bias-cut surface tape. A fabric tape in which the threads 
run at an angle of 45° to the length of the tape. Bias-cut tape 
may be stretched around a compound curve such as a wing 
tip bow without wrinkling.

Bilge area. A low portion in an aircraft structure in which 
water and contaminants collect. The area under the cabin 
floorboards is normally called the bilge.

Bipolar transistor. A solid-state component in which the 
flow of current between its emitter and collector is controlled 
by a much smaller flow of current into or out of its base. 
Bipolar transistors may be of either the NPN or PNP type.

BITE. Built-in test equipment.

Blade track. The condition of a helicopter rotor in which each 
blade follows the exact same path as the blade ahead of it.

Black box. A term used for any portion of an electrical or 
electronic system that can be removed as a unit. A black box 
does not have to be a physical box.

Bladder-type fuel cell. A plastic-impregnated fabric bag 
supported in a portion of an aircraft structure so that it forms 
a cell in which fuel is carried.

Bleeder. A material such as glass cloth or mat that is placed 
over a composite lay-up to absorb the excess resin forced out 
of the ply fibers when pressure is applied.

Bleeding dope. Dope whose pigments are soluble in the 
solvents or thinners used in the finishing system. The color 
will bleed up through the finished coats.

Bleeding of brakes. The maintenance procedure of removing 
air entrapped in hydraulic fluid in the brakes. Fluid is bled 
from the brake system until fluid with no bubbles flows out.

Blimp. A cigar-shaped, nonrigid lighter-than-air flying machine. 

Blush. A defect in a lacquer or dope finish caused by moisture 
condensing on the surface before the finish dries. If the 
humidity of the air is high, the evaporation of the solvents 
cools the air enough to cause the moisture to condense. The 
water condensed from the air mixes with the lacquer or dope 
and forms a dull, porous, chalky-looking finish called blush. 
A blushed finish is neither attractive nor protective.

Bonding. The process of electrically connecting all isolated 
components to the aircraft structure. Bonding provides a 
path for return current from electrical components, and a 
low-impedance path to ground to minimize static electrical 
charges. Shock-mounted components have bonding braids 
connected across the shock mounts.

Boost pump. An electrically driven centrifugal pump 
mounted in the bottom of the fuel tanks in large aircraft. Boost 
pumps provide a positive flow of fuel under pressure to the 
engine for starting and serve as an emergency backup in the 
event an engine-driven pump should fail. They are also used 
to transfer fuel from one tank to another and to pump fuel 
overboard when it is being dumped. Boost pumps prevent 
vapor locks by holding pressure on the fuel in the line to the 
engine-driven pump. Centrifugal boost pumps have a small 
agitator propeller on top of the impeller to force vapors from 
the fuel before it leaves the tank.


 G-6

Boundary layer. The layer of air that flows next to an 
aerodynamic surface. Because of the design of the surface 
and local surface roughness, the boundary layer often has a 
random flow pattern, sometimes even flowing in a direction 
opposite to the direction of flight. A turbulent boundary layer 
causes a great deal of aerodynamic drag.

Bourdon tube. A pressure-indicating mechanism used in 
most oil pressure and hydraulic pressure gages. It consists of 
a sealed, curved tube with an elliptical cross section. Pressure 
inside the tube tries to straighten it, and as it straightens, 
it moves a pointer across a calibrated dial. Bourdon-tube 
pressure gauges are used to measure temperature by 
measuring the vapor pressure in a sealed container of a 
volatile liquid, such as methyl chloride, whose vapor pressure 
varies directly with its temperature.

Brazing. A method of thermally joining metal parts by 
wetting the surface with a molten nonferrous alloy. When 
the molten material cools and solidifies, it holds the pieces 
together. Brazing materials melt at a temperature higher than 
800 °F, but lower than the melting temperature of the metal 
on which they are used.

British thermal unit (BTU). The amount of heat energy 
needed to raise the temperature of one pound of pure water 1 °F.

Bucking bar. A heavy steel bar with smooth, hardened 
surfaces, or faces. The bucking bar is held against the end 
of the rivet shank when it is driven with a pneumatic rivet 
gun, and the shop head is formed against the bucking bar.

Buffeting. Turbulent movement of the air over an 
aerodynamic surface.

Bulb angle. An L-shaped metal extrusion having an enlarged, 
rounded edge that resembles a bulb on one of its legs.

Bulkhead. A structural partition that divides the fuselage of 
an aircraft into compartments, or bays.

Bungee shock cord. A cushioning material used with the 
nonshock absorbing landing gears installed on older aircraft. 
Bungee cord is made up of many small rubber bands encased 
in a loose-woven cotton braid.

Burnish (verb). To smooth the surface of metal that has been 
damaged by a deep scratch or gouge. The metal piled up at 
the edge of the damage is pushed back into the damage with 
a smooth, hard steel burnishing tool.

Burr. A sharp rough edge of a piece of metal left when the 
metal was sheared, punched, or drilled.

Bus. A point within an electrical system from which the 
individual circuits get their power.

Buttock line. A line used to locate a position to the right or 
left of the center line of an aircraft structure.

Butyl. Trade name for a synthetic rubber product made by the 
polymerization of isobutylene. Butyl withstands such potent 
chemicals as phosphate ester-base (Skydrol) hydraulic fluids.

Cage (verb). To lock the gimbals of a gyroscopic instrument 
so it will not be damaged by abrupt flight maneuvers or 
rough handling.

Calendar month. A measurement of time used by the FAA 
for inspection and certification purposes. One calendar month 
from a given day extends from that day until midnight of the 
last day of that month.

Calibrated airspeed (CAS). Indicated airspeed corrected 
for position error. See position error.

Calorie. The amount of heat energy needed to raise the 
temperature of one gram of pure water 1 °C.

Canted rate gyro. A rate gyro whose gimbal axis is tilted 
so it can sense rotation of the aircraft about its roll axis as 
well as its yaw axis.

Camber (wheel alignment). The amount the wheels of an 
aircraft are tilted, or inclined, from the vertical. If the top of 
the wheel tilts outward, the camber is positive. If the top of 
the wheel tilts inward, the camber is negative.

Canard. A horizontal control surface mounted ahead of the 
wing to provide longitudinal stability and control.

Cantilever wing. A wing that is supported by its internal 
structure and requires no external supports. The wing spars 
are built in such a way that they carry all the bending and 
torsional loads.

Cap strip. The main top and bottom members of a wing rib. 
The cap strips give the rib its aerodynamic shape.

Capacitance-type fuel quantity measuring system. A 
popular type of electronic fuel quantity indicating system 
that has no moving parts in the fuel tank. The tank units are 
cylindrical capacitors, called probes, mounted across the 
tank, from top to bottom. The dielectric between the plates 
of the probes is either fuel or the air above the fuel, and the 
capacitance of the probe varies with the amount of fuel in 
the tank. The indicator is a servo-type instrument driven by 
the amplified output of a capacitance bridge.


G-7

Capillary tube. A soft copper tube with a small inside 
diameter. The capillary tube used with vapor-pressure 
thermometer connects the temperature sensing bulb to the 
Bourdon tube. The capillary tube is protected from physical 
damage by enclosing it in a braided metal wire jacket.

Carbon monoxide detector. A packet of chemical crystals 
mounted in the aircraft cockpit or cabin where they are easily 
visible. The crystals change their color from yellow to green 
when they are exposed to carbon monoxide.

Carbon-pile voltage regulator. A type of voltage regulator 
used with high-output DC generators. Field current is 
controlled by varying the resistance of a stack of thin carbon 
disks. This resistance is varied by controlling the amount the 
stack is compressed by a spring whose force is opposed by 
the pull of an electromagnet. The electromagnet’s strength 
is proportional to the generator’s output voltage.

Carburizing flame. An oxyacetylene flame produced by 
an excess of acetylene. This flame is identified by a feather 
around the inner cone. A carburizing flame is also called a 
reducing flame.

Carcass (tire component). The layers of rubberized fabric 
that make up the body of an aircraft tire.

Case pressure. A low pressure that is maintained inside 
the case of a hydraulic pump. If a seal becomes damaged, 
hydraulic fluid will be forced out of the pump rather than 
allowing air to be drawn into the pump.

Cathode-ray tube (CRT). A display tube used for 
oscilloscopes and computer video displays. An electron gun 
emits a stream of electrons that is attracted to a positively 
charged inner surface of the face of the tube. Acceleration and 
focusing grids speed the movement of the electrons and shape 
the beam into a pinpoint size. Electrostatic or electromagnetic 
forces caused by deflection plates or coils move the beam 
over the face of the tube. The inside surface of the face of 
the tube is treated with a phosphor material that emits light 
when the beam of electrons strikes it.

Cavitation. A condition that exist in a hydraulic pump when 
there is not enough pressure in the reservoir to force fluid to 
the inlet of the pump. The pump picks up air instead of fluid.

CDI. Course deviation indicator.

CDU. Control display unit.

Center of gravity. The location on an aircraft about which 
the force of gravity is concentrated.

Center of lift. The location of the chord line of an airfoil at 
which all the lift forces produced by the airfoil are considered 
to be concentrated.

Center of pressure. The point on the chord line of an airfoil 
where all of the aerodynamic forces are considered to be 
concentrated.

Centering cam. A cam in the nose-gear shock strut that 
causes the piston to center when the strut fully extends. 
When the aircraft takes off and the strut extends, the wheel is 
straightened in its fore-and-aft position so it can be retracted 
into the wheel well.

Charging stand (air conditioning service equipment). 
A handy and compact arrangement of air conditioning 
servicing equipment. A charging stand contains a vacuum 
pump, a manifold gauge set, and a method of measuring and 
dispensing the refrigerant.

Chatter. A type of rapid vibration of a hydraulic pump 
caused by the pump taking in some air along with the 
hydraulic fluid.

Check (wood defect). Longitudinal cracks that extend across 
a log’s annual rings.

Check valve. A hydraulic or pneumatic system component 
that allows full flow of fluid in one direction but blocks all 
flow in the opposite direction.

Chemical oxygen candle system. An oxygen system used 
for emergency or backup use. Solid blocks of material that 
release oxygen when they are burned are carried in special 
fireproof fixtures. When oxygen is needed, the candles are 
ignited with an integral igniter, and oxygen flows into the 
tubing leading to the masks.

Chevron seal. A form of one-way seal used in some fluid-
power actuators. A chevron seal is made of a resilient material 
whose cross section is in the shape of the letter V. The pressure 
being sealed must be applied to the open side of the V.

Chromel. An alloy of nickel and chromium used as the 
positive element in a thermocouple for measuring exhaust 
gas temperature.

Circle. A closed plane figure with every point an equal 
distance from the center. A circle has the greatest area for 
its circumference of any enclosed shape.


 G-8

Circuit breaker. An electrical component that automatically 
opens a circuit any time excessive current flows through it.
A circuit breaker may be reset to restore the circuit after the 
fault causing the excessive current has been corrected.

Clad aluminum. A sheet of aluminum alloy that has a 
coating of pure aluminum rolled on one or both of its surfaces 
for corrosion protection.

Clamp-on ammeter. An electrical instrument used to measure 
current without opening the circuit through which it is flowing. 
The jaws of the ammeter are opened, slipped over the current-
carrying wire, and then clamped shut. Current flowing through 
the wire produces a magnetic field which induces a voltage 
in the ammeter that is proportional to the amount of current.

Cleco fastener. A patented spring-type fastener used to 
hold metal sheets in position until they can be permanently 
riveted together.

Close-quarter iron. A small hand-held iron with an 
accurately calibrated thermostat. This iron is used for heat-
shrinking polyester fabrics in areas that would be difficult 
to work with a large iron.

Closed angle. An angle formed in sheet metal that has been 
bent more than 90°.

Closed assembly time. The time elapsing between the 
assembly of glued joints and the application of pressure.

Closed-center hydraulic system. A hydraulic system in 
which the selector valves are installed in parallel with each 
other. When no unit is actuated, fluid circulates from the 
pump back to the reservoir without flowing through any of 
the selector valves.

Closed-center selector valve. A type of flow-control valve 
used to direct pressurized fluid into one side of an actuator, 
and at the same time, direct the return fluid from the other 
side of the actuator to the fluid reservoir. Closed-center 
selector valves are connected in parallel between the pressure 
manifold and the return manifold.

Coaxial. Rotating about the same axis. Coaxial rotors of a 
helicopter are mounted on concentric shafts in such a way 
that they turn in opposite directions to cancel torque.

Coaxial cable. A special type of electrical cable that consists 
of a central conductor held rigidly in the center of a braided 
outer conductor. Coaxial cable, commonly called coax, is used 
for attaching radio receivers and transmitters to their antenna.

Coefficient of drag. A dimensionless number used in the 
formula for determining induced drag as it relates to the 
angle of attack.

Coefficient of lift. A dimensionless number relating to 
the angle of attack used in the formula for determining 
aerodynamic lift.

Coin dimpling. A process of preparing a hole in sheet metal 
for flush riveting. A coining die is pressed into the rivet 
hole to form a sharp-edged depression into which the rivet 
head fits.

Collective pitch control. The helicopter control that changes 
the pitch of all of the rotor blades at the same time. Movement 
of the collective pitch control increases or decreases the lift 
produced by the entire rotor disk.

Collodion. Cellulose nitrate used as a film base for certain 
aircraft dopes.

Combustion heater. A type of cabin heater used in some 
aircraft. Gasoline from the aircraft fuel tanks is burned in 
the heater.

Compass fluid. A highly refined, water-clear petroleum 
product similar to kerosene. Compass fluid is used to dampen 
the oscillations of magnetic compasses.

Compass rose. A location on an airport where an aircraft can 
be taken to have its compasses “swung.” Lines are painted on 
the rose to mark the magnetic directions in 30° increments.

Compass swinging. A maintenance procedure that minimizes 
deviation error in a magnetic compass. The aircraft is aligned on 
a compass rose, and the compensating magnets in the compass 
case are adjusted so the compass card indicates the direction 
marked on the rose. After the deviation error is minimized on all 
headings, a compass correction card is completed and mounted 
on the instrument panel next to the compass.

Compensated fuel pump. A vane-type, engine-driven 
fuel pump that has a diaphragm connected to the pressure 
regulating valve. The chamber above the diaphragm is vented 
to the carburetor upper deck where it senses the pressure 
of the air as it enters the engine. The diaphragm allows the 
fuel pump to compensate for altitude changes and keeps the 
carburetor inlet fuel pressure a constant amount higher than 
the carburetor inlet air pressure.


G-9

Compensator port (brake system component). A small 
hole between a hydraulic brake master cylinder and the 
reservoir. When the brakes are released, this port is uncovered 
and the fluid in the master cylinder is vented to the reservoir. 
When the brake is applied, the master-cylinder piston covers 
the compensator port and allows pressure in the line to the 
brake to build up and apply the brakes. When the brake is 
released, the piston uncovers the compensator port. If any 
fluid has been lost from the brake, the reservoir will refill 
the master cylinder. A restricted compensator port will cause 
the brakes to drag or will cause them to be slow to release.

Composite. Something made up of different materials 
combined in such a way that the characteristics of the 
resulting material are different from those of any of the 
components.

Compound curve. A curve formed in more than one plane. 
The surface of a sphere is a compound curve.

Compound gauge (air conditioning servicing equipment). 
A pressure gauge used to measure the pressure in the low 
side of an air conditioning system. A compound gauge is 
calibrated from zero to 30 inches of mercury vacuum, and 
from zero to about 150-psi positive gauge pressure.

Compressibility effect. The sudden increase in the total drag 
of an airfoil in transonic flight caused by formation of shock 
waves on the surface.

Compression failure. A type of structural failure in wood 
caused by the application of too great a compressive load. A 
compression failure shows up as a faint line running at right 
angles to the grain of the wood.

Compression strut. A heavy structural member, often in 
the form of a steel tube, used to hold the spars of a Pratt 
truss airplane wing apart. A compression strut opposes the 
compressive loads between the spars arising from the tensile 
loads produced by the drag and antidrug wires.

Compression wood. A defect in wood that causes it to have 
a high specific gravity and the appearance of an excessive 
growth of summerwood. In most species, there is little 
difference between the color of the springwood and the 
summerwood. Any material containing compression wood 
is unsuited for aircraft structural use and must be rejected.

Compressor (air conditioning system component). 
The component in a vapor-cycle cooling system in which 
the low-pressure refrigerant vapors, after they leave the 
evaporator, are compressed to increase both their temperature 
and pressure before they pass into the condenser. Some 
compressors are driven by electric motors, others by 
hydraulic motors and, in the case of most light airplanes, are 
belt driven from the engine.

Concave surface. A surface that is curved inward. The outer 
edges are higher than the center.

Condenser (air conditioning system component). The 
component in a vapor-cycle cooling system in which the 
heat taken from the aircraft cabin is given up to the ambient 
air outside the aircraft.

Conductor (electrical). A material that allows electrons to 
move freely from one atom to another within the material.

Coning angle. The angle formed between the plane of 
rotation of a helicopter rotor blade when it is producing lift 
and a line perpendicular to the rotor shaft. The degree of the 
coning angle is determined by the relationship between the 
centrifugal force acting on the blades and the aerodynamic 
lift produced by the blades.

Constant (mathematical). A value used in a mathematical 
computation that is the same every time it is used. For example, 
the relationship between the length of the circumference of 
a circle and the length of its diameter is a constant, 3.1416. 
This constant is called by the Greek name of Pi (π).

Constant differential mode (cabin pressurization). 
The mode of pressurization in which the cabin pressure is 
maintained a constant amount higher than the outside air 
pressure. The maximum differential pressure is determined 
by the structural strength of the aircraft cabin.

Constant-displacement pump. A fluid pump that moves a 
specific volume of fluid each time it rotates; the faster the 
pump turns, the more fluid it moves. Some form of pressure 
regulator or relief valve must be used with a constant-
displacement pump when it is driven by an aircraft engine.

Constant-speed drive (CSD). A special drive system used to 
connect an alternating current generator to an aircraft engine. 
The drive holds the generator speed (and thus its frequency) 
constant as the engine speed varies.

Constantan. A copper-nickel alloy used as the negative 
lead of a thermocouple for measuring the cylinder head 
temperature of a reciprocating engine.


 G-10

Contactor (electrical component). A remotely actuated, 
heavy-duty electrical switch. Contactors are used in an aircraft 
electrical system to connect the battery to the main bus.

Continuity tester. A troubleshooting tool that consists 
of a battery, a light bulb, and test leads. The test leads are 
connected to each end of the conductor under test, and if the 
bulb lights up, there is continuity. If it does not light up, the 
conductor is open.

Continuous Airworthiness Inspection Program. An 
inspection program that is part of a continuous airworthiness 
maintenance program approved for certain large airplanes 
(to which 14 CFR Part 125 is not applicable), turbojet 
multi-engine airplanes, turbopropeller-powered multi-engine 
airplanes, and turbine-powered rotorcraft.

Continuous-duty solenoid. A solenoid-type switch designed 
to be kept energized by current flowing through its coil for an 
indefinite period of time. The battery contactor in an aircraft 
electrical system is a continuous-duty solenoid. Current flows 
through its coil all the time the battery is connected to the 
electrical system.

Continuous-flow oxygen system. A type of oxygen system 
that allows a metered amount of oxygen to continuously 
flow into the mask. A rebreather-type mask is used with a 
continuous-flow system. The simplest form of continuous-
flow oxygen system regulates the flow by a calibrated orifice 
in the outlet to the mask, but most systems use either a manual 
or automatic regulator to vary the pressure across the orifice 
proportional to the altitude being flown.

Continuous-loop fire-detection system. A fire-detection 
system that uses a continuous loop of two conductors 
separated with a thermistor-type insulation. Under normal 
temperature conditions, the thermistor material is an 
insulator; but if it is exposed to a fire, the thermistor changes 
into a conductor and completes the circuit between the two 
conductors, initiating a fire warning.

Control horn. The arm on a control surface to which the 
control cable or push-pull rod attaches to move the surface.

Control stick. The type of control device used in some 
airplanes. A vertical stick in the flight deck controls the 
ailerons by side-to-side movement and the elevators by fore-
and-aft movement.

Control yoke. The movable column on which an airplane 
control wheel is mounted. The yoke may be moved in or out 
to actuate the elevators, and the control wheel may be rotated 
to actuate the ailerons.

Controllability. The characteristic of an aircraft that allows 
it to change its flight attitude in response to the pilot’s 
movement of the flight deck controls.

Conventional current. An imaginary flow of electricity that 
is said to flow from the positive terminal of a power source, 
through the external circuit to its negative terminal. The 
arrowheads in semiconductor symbols point in the direction 
of conventional current flow.

Converging duct. A duct, or passage, whose cross-sectional 
area decreases in the direction of fluid flow.

Conversion coating. A chemical solution used to form an 
airtight oxide or phosphate film on the surface of aluminum 
or magnesium parts. The conversion coating prevents air from 
reaching the metal and keeps it from corroding.

Convex surface. A surface that is curved outward. The outer 
edges are lower than the center.

Coriolis effect. The change in rotor blade velocity to 
compensate for a change in the distance between the center 
of mass of the rotor blade and the axis rotation of the blade 
as the blades flap in flight.

Cornice brake. A large shop tool used to make straight 
bends across a sheet of metal. Cornice brakes are often called 
leaf brakes.

Corrugated metal. Sheets of metal that have been made 
more rigid by forming a series of parallel ridges or waves 
in its surface. 

Cotter pin. A split metal pin used to safety a castellated or 
slotted nut on a bolt. The pin is passed through the hole in 
the shank of the bolt and the slots in the nut, and the ends 
of the pin are spread to prevent it backing out of the hole.

Countersinking. Preparation of a rivet hole for a flush 
rivet by beveling the edges of the holes with a cutter of the 
correct angle.

Coverite surface thermometer. A small surface-type 
bimetallic thermometer that calibrates the temperature of an 
iron used to heat-shrink polyester fabrics.

Crabbing. Pointing the nose of an aircraft into the wind to 
compensate for wind drift.

Crazing. A form of stress-caused damage that occurs in a 
transparent thermoplastic material. Crazing appears as a series 
of tiny, hair-like cracks just below the surface of the plastic.


G-11

Critical Mach number. The flight Mach number at which 
there is the first indication of supersonic airflow over any 
part of the aircraft structure.

Cross coat. A double coat of aircraft finishing material in 
which the second coat is sprayed at right angles to the first 
coat, before the solvents have evaporated from the first coat.

Cross-feed valve (fuel system component). A valve in a 
fuel system that allows any of the engines of a multi-engine 
aircraft to draw fuel from any fuel tank. Cross-feed systems 
are used to allow a multi-engine aircraft to maintain a 
balanced fuel condition.

Cross-flow valve. An automatic flow-control valve installed 
between the gear-up and gear-down lines of the landing gear 
of some large airplanes. When the landing gear is released 
from its uplocks, its weight causes it to fall faster than the 
hydraulic system can supply fluid to the gear-down side 
of the actuation cylinder. The cross-flow valve opens and 
directs fluid from the gear-up side into the gear-down side. 
This allows the gear to move down with a smooth motion.

CRT. Cathode-ray tube.

Cryogenic liquid. A liquid which boils at temperatures of less 
than about 110 °F (–163 °C) at normal atmospheric pressures.

Cuno filter. The registered trade name for a particular style 
of edge-type fluid filter. Cuno filters are made up of a stack 
of thin metal disks that are separated by thin scraper blades. 
Contaminants collect on the edge of the disks, and they are 
periodically scraped out and allowed to collect in the bottom 
of the filter case for future removal.

Current. A general term used for electrical flow. See 
conventional current.

Current limiter. An electrical component used to limit the 
amount of current a generator can produce. Some current 
limiters are a type of slow-blow fuse in the generator output. 
Other current limiters reduce the generator output voltage 
if the generator tries to put out more than its rated current.

Cusp. A pointed end.

Cyclic pitch control. The helicopter control that allows the 
pilot to change the pitch of the rotor blades individually, at 
a specific point in their rotation. The cyclic pitch control 
allows the pilot to tilt the plane of rotation of the rotor disk 
to change the direction of lift produced by the rotor.

Dacron. The registered trade name for a cloth woven from 
polyester fibers.

Damped oscillation. Oscillation whose amplitude decreases 
with time.

Database. A body of information that is available on any 
particular subject.

Data bus. A wire or group of wires that are used to move 
data within a computer system.

Debooster valve. A valve in a power brake system between 
the power brake control valve and the wheel cylinder. This 
valve lowers the pressure of the fluid going to the brake 
and increases its volume. A debooster valve increases the 
smoothness of brake application and aids in rapid release 
of the brakes.

Decay. The breakdown of the structure of wood fibers. Wood 
that shows any indication of decay must be rejected for use 
in aircraft structure.

Decomposition. The breakdown of the structure of wood 
fibers. Wood that shows any indication of decay must be 
rejected for use in aircraft structure.

Deciduous. A type of tree that sheds its foliage at the end of 
the growing season. Hardwoods come from deciduous trees.

Dedicated computer. A small digital computer, often built 
into an instrument or control device that contains a built-in 
program that causes it to perform a specific function.

Deep-vacuum pump. A vacuum pump capable of removing 
almost all of the air from a refrigeration system. A deep-
vacuum pump can reduce the pressure inside the system to 
a few microns of pressure.

Deflator cap. A cap for a tire, strut, or accumulator air valve 
that, when screwed onto the valve, depresses the valve stem 
and allows the air to escape safely through a hole in the side 
of the cap.

Deicer system. A system that removes ice after it has formed 
on an aircraft.

Delamination. The separation of the layers of a laminated 
material.

Delivery air duct check valve. An isolation valve at the 
discharge side of the air turbine that prevents the loss of 
pressurization through a disengaged cabin air compressor.


 G-12

Delta airplane. An airplane with a triangular-shaped wing. 
This wing has an extreme amount of sweepback on its leading 
edge, and a trailing edge that is almost perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the airplane.

Delta connection (electrical connection). A method of 
connecting three electrical coils into a ring or, as they are 
drawn on a schematic diagram as a triangle, a delta (D).

Denier. A measure of the fineness of the yarns in a fabric.

Density altitude. The altitude in standard air at which the 
density is the same as that of the existing air.
 
Density ratio (σ). The ratio of the density of the air at a 
given altitude to the density of the air at sea level under 
standard conditions.

Derated (electrical specification). Reduction in the rated 
voltage or current of an electrical component. Derating is 
done to extend the life or reliability of the device.

Desiccant (air conditioning component). A drying agent 
used in an air conditioning system to remove water from 
the refrigerant. A desiccant is made of silica-gel or some 
similar material.

Detent. A spring-loaded pin or tab that enters a hole or groove 
when the device to which it is attached is in a certain position. 
Detents are used on a fuel valve to provide a positive means 
of identifying the fully on and fully off position of the valve.

Detonation. An explosion, or uncontrolled burning of the 
fuel-air mixture inside the cylinder of a reciprocating engine. 
Detonation occurs when the pressure and the temperature 
inside the cylinder become higher than the critical pressure 
and temperature of the fuel. Detonation is often confused 
with preignition. 

Deviation error. An error in a magnetic compass caused 
by localized magnetic fields in the aircraft. Deviation error, 
which is different on each heading, is compensated by the 
technician “swinging” the compass. A compass must be 
compensated so the deviation error on any heading is no 
greater than 10 degrees.

Dewar bottle. A vessel designed to hold liquefied gases. It 
has double walls with the space between being evacuated to 
prevent the transfer of heat. The surfaces in the vacuum area 
are made heat-reflective.

Differential aileron travel. Aileron movement in which the 
upward-moving aileron deflects a greater distance than the 
one moving downward. The up aileron produces parasite drag 
to counteract the induced drag caused by the down aileron. 
Differential aileron travel is used to counteract adverse yaw.

Differential pressure. The difference between two pressures. 
An airspeed indicator is a differential-pressure gauge. It 
measures the difference between static air pressure and pitot 
air pressure.

Differential-voltage reverse-current cutout. A type of 
reverse-current cutout switch used with heavy-duty electrical 
systems. This switch connects the generator to the electrical 
bus when the generator voltage is a specific amount higher 
than the battery voltage.

Digital multimeter. An electrical test instrument that can be 
used to measure voltage, current, and resistance. The indication 
is in the form of a liquid crystal display in discrete numbers.

Dihedral. The positive angle formed between the lateral axis 
of an airplane and a line that passes through the center of the 
wing or horizontal stabilizer. Dihedral increases the lateral 
stability of an airplane.

Diluter-demand oxygen system. A popular type of oxygen 
system in which the oxygen is metered to the mask, where 
it is diluted with cabin air by an airflow-metering aneroid 
assembly which regulates the amount of air allowed to dilute 
the oxygen on the basis of cabin altitude. The mixture of 
oxygen and air flows only when the wearer of the mask 
inhales. The percentage of oxygen in the air delivered to the 
mask is regulated, on the basis of altitude, by the regulator.
A diluter-demand regulator has an emergency position which 
allows 100 percent oxygen to flow to the mask, by-passing 
the regulating mechanism.

Dipole antenna. A half wavelength, center-fed radio antenna. 
The length of each of the two arms is approximately one 
fourth of the wavelength of the center frequency for which 
the antenna is designed.

Dirigible. A large, cigar-shaped, rigid, lighter-than-air flying 
machine. Dirigibles are made of a rigid truss structure covered 
with fabric. Gas bags inside the structure contain the lifting 
gas, which is either helium or hydrogen.

Disc area (helicopter specification). The total area swept 
by the blades of a helicopter main rotor.

Divergent oscillation. Oscillation whose amplitude increases 
with time.


G-13

Diverging duct. A duct, or passage, whose cross-sectional 
area increases in the direction of fluid flow.

DME. Distance measuring equipment.

Dope proofing. The treatment of a structure to be covered 
with fabric to keep the solvents in the dope from softening 
the protective coating on the structure.

Dope roping. A condition of aircraft dope brushed onto a 
surface in such a way that it forms a stringy, uneven surface 
rather than flowing out smoothly.

Double-acting actuator (hydraulic system component). 
A linear actuator moved in both directions by fluid power.

Double-acting hand pump (hydraulic system component). 
A hand-operated fluid pump that moves fluid during both 
strokes of the pump handle.

Doubler. A piece of sheet metal used to strengthen and stiffen 
a repair in a sheet metal structure.

Downtime. Any time during which an aircraft is out of 
commission and unable to be operated.

Downwash. Air forced down by aerodynamic action below 
and behind the wing of an airplane or the rotor of a helicopter. 
Aerodynamic lift is produced when the air is deflected 
downward. The upward force on the aircraft is the same as 
the downward force on the air.

Drag (helicopter rotor blade movement). Fore-and-aft 
movement of the tip of a helicopter rotor blade in its plane 
of rotation.

Dragging brakes. Brakes that do not fully release when the 
brake pedal is released. The brakes are partially applied all 
the time, which causes excessive lining wear and heat.

Drag wire. A structural wire inside a Pratt truss airplane 
wing between the spars. Drag wires run from the front spar 
inboard, to the rear spar at the next bay outboard. Drag wires 
oppose the forces that try to drag the wing backward.

Drill motor. An electric or pneumatic motor that drives a 
chuck that holds a twist drill. The best drill motors produce 
high torque, and their speed can be controlled.

Drip stick. A fuel quantity indicator used to measure the 
fuel level in the tank when the aircraft is on the ground. The 
drip stick is pulled down from the bottom of the tank until 
fuel drips from its opened end. This indicates that the top of 
the gauge inside the tank is at the level of the fuel. Note the 
number of inches read on the outside of the gauge at the point 
it contacts the bottom of the tank, and use a drip stick table 
to convert this measurement into gallons of fuel in the tank.

Dry air pump. An engine-driven air pump which used carbon 
vanes. Dry pumps do not use any lubrication, and the vanes 
are extremely susceptible to damage from the solid airborne 
particles. These pumps must be operated with filters in their 
inlet so they will take in only filtered air.

Dry ice. Solidified carbon dioxide. Dry ice sublimates, or 
changes from a solid directly into a gas, at a temperature of 
–110 °F (–78.5 °C).

Dry rot. Decomposition of wood fibers caused by fungi. Dry 
rot destroys all strength in the wood.

Ductility. The property of a material that allows it to be 
drawn into a thin section without breaking.

Dummy load (electrical load). A noninductive, high-power, 
50-ohm resistor that can be connected to a transmission line 
in place of the antenna. The transmitter can be operated into 
the dummy load without transmitting any signal.

Duralumin. The name for the original alloy of aluminum, 
magnesium, manganese, and copper. Duralumin is the same 
as the modern 2017 aluminum alloy.

Dutch roll. An undesirable, low-amplitude coupled 
oscillation about both the yaw and roll axes that affects many 
swept wing airplanes. Dutch roll is minimized by the use of 
a yaw damper.

Dutchman shears. A common name for compound-action 
sheet metal shears.

Dynamic pressure (q). The pressure a moving fluid would 
have if it were stopped. Dynamic pressure is measured in 
pounds per square foot.


 G-14

Dynamic stability. The stability that causes an aircraft to 
return to a condition of straight and level flight after it has been 
disturbed from this condition. When an aircraft is disturbed 
from the straight and level flight, its static stability starts it back 
in the correct direction; but it overshoots, and the corrective 
forces are applied in the opposite direction. The aircraft 
oscillates back and forth on both sides of the correct condition, 
with each oscillation smaller than the one before it. Dynamic 
stability is the decreasing of these restorative oscillations.

EADI. Electronic Attitude Director Indicator.

ECAM. Electronic Centralized Aircraft Monitor.

Eccentric brushing. A special bushing used between the 
rear spar of certain cantilever airplane wings and the wing 
attachment fitting on the fuselage. The portion of the bushing 
that fits through the hole in the spar is slightly offset from that 
which passes through the holes in the fitting. By rotating the 
bushing, the rear spar may be moved up or down to adjust 
the root incidence of the wing.

Eddy current damping (electrical instrument damping). 
Decreasing the amplitude of oscillations by the interaction 
of magnetic fields. In the case of a vertical-card magnetic 
compass, flux from the oscillating permanent magnet 
produces eddy currents in a damping disk or cup. The 
magnetic flux produced by the eddy currents opposes the flux 
from the permanent magnet and decreases the oscillations.

Edge distance. The distance between the center of a rivet 
hole and the edge of the sheet of metal.

EFIS. Electronic Flight Instrument System.

EHSI. Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicator.

EICAS. Engine Indicating and Crew Alerting System.

Ejector. A form of jet pump used to pick up a liquid and 
move it to another location. Ejectors are used to ensure that 
the compartment in which the boost pumps are mounted is 
kept full of fuel. Part of the fuel from the boost pump flowing 
through the ejector produces a low pressure that pulls fuel from 
the main tank and forces it into the boostpump sump area.

Elastic limit. The maximum amount of tensile load, in 
pounds per square inch, a material is able to withstand without 
being permanently deformed.

Electromotive force (EMF). The force that causes electrons 
to move from one atom to another within an electrical 
circuit. Electromotive force is an electrical pressure, and it 
is measured in volts.

Electron current. The actual flow of electrons in a circuit. 
Electrons flow from the negative terminal of a power source 
through the external circuit to its positive terminal. The 
arrowheads in semiconductor symbols point in the direction 
opposite to the flow of electron current.

ELT (emergency locator transmitter). A self-contained 
radio transmitter that automatically begins transmitting on 
the emergency frequencies any time it is triggered by a severe 
impact parallel to the longitudinal axis of the aircraft.

Elevator downspring. A spring in the elevator control 
system that produces a mechanical force that tries to lower the 
elevator. In normal flight, this spring force is overcome by the 
aerodynamic force from the elevator trim tab. But in slow flight 
with an aft CG position, the trim tab loses its effectiveness and 
the downspring lowers the nose to prevent a stall.

Elevons. Movable control surfaces on the trailing edge of a delta 
wing or a flying wing airplane. These surfaces operate together 
to serve as elevators, and differentially to act as ailerons.

EMI. Electromagnetic interference.

Empennage. The tail section of an airplane.

Enamel. A type of finishing material that flows out to form 
a smooth surface. Enamel is usually made of a pigment 
suspended in some form of resin. When the resin cures, it 
leaves a smooth, glossy protective surface.

Energizing brake. A brake that uses the momentum of the 
aircraft to increase its effectiveness by wedging the shoe 
against the brake drum. Energizing brakes are also called servo 
brakes. A single-servo brake is energizing only when moving 
in the forward direction, and a duo-servo brake is energizing 
when the aircraft is moving either forward or backward.

Epoxy. A flexible, thermosetting resin that is made by 
polymerization of an epoxide. Epoxy has wide application 
as a matrix for composite materials and as an adhesive that 
bonds many different types of materials. It is noted for its 
durability and its chemical resistance.

Equalizing resistor. A large resistor in the ground circuit 
of a heavy-duty aircraft generator through which all of the 
generator output current flows. The voltage drop across this 
resistor is used to produce the current in the paralleling circuit 
that forces the generators to share the electrical load equally.

Ethylene dibromide. A chemical compound added to 
aviation gasoline to convert some of the deposits left by 
the tetraethyl lead into lead bromides. These bromides are 
volatile and will pass out of the engine with the exhaust gases.


G-15

Ethylene glycol. A form of alcohol used as a coolant for 
liquid-cooled engines and as an anti-icing agent.

Eutectic material. An alloy or solution that has the lowest 
possible melting point.

Evacuation (air conditioning servicing procedure). 
A procedure in servicing vapor-cycle cooling systems. 
A vacuum pump removes all the air from the system. 
Evacuation removes all traces of water vapor that could 
condense out, freeze, and block the system.

Evaporator (air conditioning component). The component 
in a vapor-cycle cooling system in which heat from the 
aircraft cabin is absorbed into the refrigerant. As the heat is 
absorbed, the refrigerant evaporates, or changes from a liquid 
into a vapor. The function of the evaporator is to lower the 
cabin air temperature.

Expander-tube brake. A brake that uses hydraulic fluid 
inside a synthetic rubber tube around the brake hub to force 
rectangular blocks of brake-lining material against the 
rotating brake drum. Friction between the brake drum and 
the lining material slows the aircraft.

Expansion wave. The change in pressure and velocity of a 
supersonic flow of air as it passes over a surface which drops 
away from the flow. As the surface drops away, the air tries 
to follow it. In changing its direction, the air speeds up to a 
higher supersonic velocity and its static pressure decreases. 
There is no change in the total energy as the air passes through 
an expansion wave, and so there is no sound as there is when 
air passes through a shock wave.

Extruded angle. A structural angle formed by passing metal 
heated to its plastic state through specially shaped dies.

FAA Form 337. The FAA form that must be filled in and 
submitted to the FAA when a major repair or major alteration 
has been completed.

Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards 
District Office (FAA FSDO). An FAA field office serving 
an assigned geographical area staffed with Flight Standards 
personnel who serve the aviation industry and the general 
public on matters relating to certification and operation of 
air carrier and general aviation aircraft.

Fading of brakes. The decrease in the amount of braking 
action that occurs with some types of brakes that are applied 
for a long period of time. True fading occurs with overheated 
drum-type brakes. As the drum is heated, it expands in a 
bell-mouthed fashion. This decreases the amount of drum 
in contact with the brake shoes and decreases the braking 
action. A condition similar to brake fading occurs when there 
is an internal leak in the brake master cylinder. The brakes 
are applied, but as the pedal is held down, fluid leaks past 
the piston, and the brakes slowly release.

Fairing. A part of a structure whose primary purpose is to 
produce a smooth surface or a smooth junction where two 
surfaces join.

Fairlead. A plastic or wooden guide used to prevent a steel 
control cable rubbing against an aircraft structure.

FCC. Federal Communications Commission.

FCC. Flight Control Computer.

Feather (helicopter rotor blade movement). Rotation of a 
helicopter rotor blade about its pitch-change axis.

Ferrous metal. Any metal that contains iron and has 
magnetic characteristics.

Fiber stop nut. A form of a self-locking nut that has a fiber 
insert crimped into a recess above the threads. The hole in 
the insert is slightly smaller than the minor diameter of the 
threads. When the nut is screwed down over the bolt threads, 
the opposition caused by the fiber insert produces a force that 
prevents vibration loosening the nut.

File. A hand-held cutting tool used to remove a small amount 
of metal with each stroke.

Fill threads. Threads in a piece of fabric that run across the 
width of the fabric, interweaving with the warp threads. Fill 
threads are often called woof, or weft, threads.

Fillet. A fairing used to give shape but not strength to 
an object. A fillet produces a smooth junction where two 
surfaces meet.

Finishing tape. Another name for surface tape. See surface 
tape.


 G-16

Fishmouth splice. A type of splice used in a welded tubular 
structure in which the end of the tube whose inside diameter 
is the same as the outside diameter of the tube being spliced 
is cut in the shape of a V, or a fishmouth, and is slipped over 
the smaller tube welded. A fishmouth splice has more weld 
area than a butt splice and allows the stresses from one tube 
to transfer into the other tube gradually.

Fire pull handle. The handle in an aircraft flight deck that is 
pulled at the first indication of an engine fire. Pulling this handle 
removes the generator from the electrical system, shuts off the 
fuel and hydraulic fluid to the engine, and closes the compressor 
bleed air valve. The fire extinguisher agent discharge switch 
is uncovered, but it is not automatically closed.

Fire zone. A portion of an aircraft designated by the 
manufacturer to require fire-detection and/or fire-extinguishing 
equipment and a high degree of inherent fire resistance.

Fitting. An attachment device that is used to connect 
components to an aircraft structure.

Fixed fire-extinguishing system. A fire-extinguishing 
system installed in an aircraft.

Flameout. A condition in the operation of a gas turbine 
engine in which the fire in the engine unintentionally goes 
out.

Flap (aircraft control). A secondary control on an airplane 
wing that changes its camber to increase both its lift and its drag. 

Flap (helicopter rotor blade movement). Up-and-down 
movement of the tip of a helicopter rotor blade.

Flap overload valve. A valve in the flap system of an airplane 
that prevents the flaps being lowered at an airspeed which 
could cause structural damage. If the pilot tries to extend the 
flaps when the airspeed is too high, the opposition caused 
by the air flow will open the overload valve and return the 
fluid to the reservoir.

Flash point. The temperature to which a material must be 
raised for it to ignite, but not continue to burn, when a flame 
is passed above it.

Flat pattern layout. The pattern for a sheet metal part that 
has the material used for each flat surface, and for all of the 
bends, marked out with bend-tangent lines drawn between 
the flats and bend allowances.

Flight controller. The component in an autopilot system that 
allows the pilot to maneuver the aircraft manually when the 
autopilot is engaged.

Fluid. A form of material whose molecules are able to flow 
past one another without destroying the material. Gases and 
liquids are both fluids.

Fluid power. The transmission of force by the movement of 
a fluid. The most familiar examples of fluid power systems 
are hydraulic and pneumatic systems.

Flutter. Rapid and uncontrolled oscillation of a flight 
control surface on an aircraft that is caused by a dynamically 
unbalanced condition.

Fly-by-wire. A method of control used by some modern 
aircraft in which control movement or pressures exerted by 
the pilot are directed into a digital computer where they are 
input into a program tailored to the flight characteristics of 
the aircraft. The computer output signal is sent to actuators 
at the control surfaces to move them the optimum amount 
for the desired maneuver.

Flying boat. An airplane whose fuselage is built in the form 
of a boat hull to allow it to land and takeoff from water. In 
the past, flying boats were a popular form of large airplane.

Flying wing. A type of heavier-than-air aircraft that has no 
fuselage or separate tail surfaces. The engines and useful load 
are carried inside the wing, and movable control surfaces on 
the trailing edge provide both pitch and roll control.

Foot-pound. A measure of work accomplished when a force 
of 1 pound moves an object a distance of 1 foot.

Force. Energy brought to bear on an object that tends to 
cause motion or to change motion.

Forehand welding. Welding in which the torch is pointed 
in the direction the weld is progressing.

Form drag. Parasite drag caused by the form of the object 
passing through the air.

Former. An aircraft structural member used to give a 
fuselage its shape.

FMC. Flight Management Computer.

Forward bias. A condition of operation of a semiconductor 
device such as a diode or transistor in which a positive voltage 
is connected to the P-type material and a negative voltage to 
the N-type material.

FPD. Freezing point depressant.


G-17

Fractional distillation. A method of separating the various 
components from a physical mixture of liquids. The material 
to be separated is put into a container and its temperature is 
increased. The components having the lowest boiling points 
boil off first and are condensed. Then, as the temperature is 
further raised, other components are removed. Kerosene, 
gasoline, and other petroleum products are obtained by 
fractional distillation of crude oil.

Frangible. Breakable, or easily broken.

Freon. The registered trade name for a refrigerant used in a 
vapor-cycle air conditioning system.

Frise aileron. An aileron with its hinge line set back from the 
leading edge so that when it is deflected upward, part of the 
leading edge projects below the wing and produces parasite 
drag to help overcome adverse yaw.

Full-bodied. Not thinned.

Fully articulated rotor. A helicopter rotor whose blades are 
attached to the hub in such a way that they are free to flap, 
drag, and feather. See each of these terms.

Frost. Ice crystal deposits formed by sublimation when the 
temperature and dew point are below freezing.

Fuel-flow transmitter. A device in the fuel line between the 
engine-driven fuel pump and the carburetor that measures the 
rate of flow of the fuel. It converts this flow rate into an electrical 
signal and sends it to an indicator in the instrument panel.

Fuel jettison system. A system installed in most large 
aircraft that allows the flight crew to jettison, or dump, fuel 
to lower the gross weight of the aircraft to its allowable 
landing weight. Boost pumps in the fuel tanks move the fuel 
from the tank into a fuel manifold. From the fuel manifold, 
it flows away from the aircraft through dump chutes is each 
wing tip. The fuel jettison system must be so designed and 
constructed that it is free from fire hazards.

Fuel totalizer. A fuel quantity indicator that gives the 
total amount of fuel remaining on board the aircraft on one 
instrument. The totalizer adds the quantities of fuel in all of 
the tanks.

Fungus (plural: fungi). Any of several types of plant life 
that include yeasts, molds, and mildew.

Fusible plugs. Plugs in the wheels of high-performance 
airplanes that use tubeless tires. The centers of the plugs are 
filled with a metal that melts at a relatively low temperature.
If a takeoff is aborted and the pilot uses the brakes excessively, 
the heat transferred into the wheel will melt the center of the 
fusible plugs and allow the air to escape from the tire before 
it builds up enough pressure to cause an explosion.

Gauge (rivet). The distance between rows of rivets in a 
multirow seam. Gauge is also called transverse pitch.

Gauge pressure. Pressure referenced from the existing 
atmospheric pressure.

Galling. Fretting or pulling out chunks of a surface by sliding 
contact with another surface or body.

Gasket. A seal between two parts where there is no relative 
motion.

Gear-type pump. A constant-displacement fluid pump that 
contains two meshing large-tooth spur gears. Fluid is drawn 
into the pump as the teeth separate and is carried around the 
inside of the housing with teeth and is forced from the pump 
when the teeth come together.

Generator. A mechanical device that transforms mechanical 
energy into electrical energy by rotating a coil inside a 
magnetic field. As the conductors in the coil cut across the 
lines of magnetic flux, a voltage is generated that causes 
current to flow.

Generator series field. A set of heavy field windings in 
a generator connected in a series with the armature. The 
magnetic field produced by the series windings is used to 
change the characteristics of the generator.

Generator shunt field. A set of field windings in a generator 
connected in parallel with the armature. Varying the amount 
of current flowing in the shunt field windings controls the 
voltage output of the generator.

Gerotor pump. A form of constant-displacement gear pump. 
A gerotor pump uses an external-tooth spur gear that rides 
inside of and drives an internal-tooth rotor gear. There is 
one more tooth space inside the rotor than there are teeth 
on the drive gear. As the gears rotate, the volume of the 
space between two of the teeth on the inlet side of the pump 
increases, while the volume of the space between the two 
teeth on the opposite side of the pump decreases.

GHz (gigahertz). 1,000,000,000 cycles per second.


 G-18

Gimbal. A support that allows a gyroscope to remain in an 
upright condition when its base is tilted.

Glass cockpit. An aircraft instrument system that uses a 
few cathode-ray-tube displays to replace a large number of 
mechanically actuated instruments.

Glaze ice. Ice that forms when large drops of water strike 
a surface whose temperature is below freezing. Glaze ice is 
clear and heavy.

Glide slope. The portion of an ILS (Instrument Landing 
System) that provides the vertical path along which an aircraft 
descends on an instrument landing.

Goniometer. Electronic circuitry in an ADF system that 
uses the output of a fixed loop antenna to sense the angle 
between a fixed reference, usually the nose of the aircraft, and 
the direction from which the radio signal is being received.

Gram. The basic unit of weight or mass in the metric system. 
One gram equals approximately 0.035 ounce.

Graphite. A form of carbon. Structural graphite is used in 
composite structure because of its strength and stiffness.

Greige (pronounced “gray”). The unshrunk condition of a 
polyester fabric as it is removed from the loom.

Ground effect. The increased aerodynamic lift produced 
when an airplane or helicopter is flown nearer than half 
wing span or rotor span to the ground. This additional lift is 
caused by an effective increase in angle of attack without the 
accompanying increase in induced drag, which is caused by 
the deflection of the downwashed air.

Ground. The voltage reference point in an aircraft electrical 
system. Ground has zero electrical potential. Voltage values, 
both positive and negative, are measured from ground. In the 
United Kingdom, ground is spoken of as “earth.”

Ground-power unit (GPU). A service component used to 
supply electrical power to an aircraft when it is being operated 
on the ground.

Guncotton. A highly explosive material made by treating 
cotton fibers with nitric and sulfuric acids. Guncotton is used 
in making the film base of nitrate dope.

Gusset. A small plate attached to two or more members of 
a truss structure. A gusset strengthens the truss.

Gyro (gyroscope). The sensing device in an autopilot system. 
A gyroscope is a rapidly spinning wheel with its weight 
concentrated around its rim. Gyroscopes have two basic 
characteristics that make them useful in aircraft instruments: 
rigidity in space and precession. See rigidity in space and 
precession.

Gyroscopic precession. The characteristic of a gyroscope 
that causes it to react to an applied force as though the force 
were applied at a point 90° in the direction of rotation from 
the actual point of application. The rotor of a helicopter acts 
in much the same way as a gyroscope and is affected by 
gyroscopic precession.

Halon 1211. A halogenated hydrocarbon fire-extinguishing 
agent used in many HRD fire-extinguishing systems for 
powerplant protection. The technical name for Halon 1211 
is bromochlorodifluoromethane.

Halon 1301. A halogenated hydrocarbon fire-extinguishing 
agent that is one of the best for extinguishing cabin and 
powerplant fires. It is highly effective and is the least toxic 
of the extinguishing agents available. The technical name for 
Halon 1301 is bromotrifluoromethane.

Hangar rash. Scrapes, bends, and dents in an aircraft 
structure caused by careless handling.

Hardwood. Wood from a broadleaf tree that sheds its leaves 
each year.

Heading indicator. A gyroscopic flight instrument that gives 
the pilot an indication of the heading of the aircraft.

Heat exchanger. A device used to exchange heat from one 
medium to another. Radiators, condensers, and evaporators 
are all examples of heat exchangers. Heat always moves from 
the object or medium having the greatest level of heat energy 
to a medium or object having a lower level.

Helix. A screw-like, or spiral, curve.

Hertz. One cycle per second.

Holding relay. An electrical relay that is closed by sending 
a pulse of current through the coil. It remains closed until the 
current flowing through its contacts is interrupted.

Homebuilt aircraft. Aircraft that are built by individuals 
as a hobby rather than by factories as commercial products. 
Homebuilt, or amateur-built, aircraft are not required to meet 
the stringent requirements imposed on the manufacture of 
FAA-certified aircraft.


G-19

Horsepower. A unit of mechanical power that is equal to 
33,000 foot-pounds of work done in 1 minute, or 550 foot-
pounds of work done in 1 second.

Hot dimpling. A process used to dimple, or indent, the hole 
into which a flush rivet is to be installed. Hot dimpling is done 
by clamping the metal between heating elements and forcing 
the dies through the holes in the softened metal. Hot dimpling 
prevents hard metal from cracking when it is dimpled.

Hot-wire cutter. A cutter used to shape blocks of Styrofoam. 
The wire is stretched tight between the arms of a frame and 
heated by electrical current. The hot wire melts its way 
through the foam.

HRD. High-rate-discharge.

HSI. Horizontal situation indicator.

Hydraulic actuator. The component in a hydraulic system 
that converts hydraulic pressure into mechanical force. The 
two main types of hydraulic actuators are linear actuators 
(cylinders and pistons) and rotary actuators (hydraulic motors).

Hydraulic fuse. A type of flow control valve that allows 
a normal flow of fluid in the system but, if the flow rate is 
excessive, or if too much fluid flows for normal operation, 
the fuse will shut off all further flow.

Hydraulic motor. A hydraulic actuator that converts 
fluid pressure into rotary motion. Hydraulic motors have 
an advantage in aircraft installations over electric motors, 
because they can operate in a stalled condition without the 
danger of a fire.

Hydraulic power pack. A small, self-contained hydraulic 
system that consists of a reservoir, pump, selector valves, and 
relief valves. The power pack is removable from the aircraft 
as a unit to facilitate maintenance and service.

Hydraulics. The system of fluid power which transmits force 
through an incompressible fluid.

Hydrocarbon. An organic compound that contains only 
carbon and hydrogen. The vast majority of fossil fuels, such 
as gasoline and turbine-engine fuel, are hydrocarbons.

Hydroplaning. A condition that exists when a high-speed 
airplane is landed on a water-covered runway. When the brakes 
are applied, the wheels lock up and the tires skid on the surface 
of the water in much the same way a water ski rides on the 
surface. Hydroplaning develops enough heat in a tire to ruin it.

Hydrostatic test. A pressure test used to determine the 
serviceability of high-pressure oxygen cylinders. The cylinders 
are filled with water and pressurized to 5⁄3 of their working 
pressure. Standard-weight cylinders (DOT 3AA) must by 
hydrostatically tested every five years, and lightweight 
cylinders (DOT 3HT) must be tested every three years.

Hypersonic speed. Speed of greater than Mach 5 (5 times 
the speed of sound).

Hyperbolic navigation. Electronic navigation systems that 
determine aircraft location by the time difference between 
reception of two signals. Signals from two stations at different 
locations will be received in the aircraft at different times. 
A line plotted between two stations along which the time 
difference is the same forms a hyperbola.

Hypoxia. A physiological condition in which a person is 
deprived of the needed oxygen. The effects of hypoxia 
normally disappear as soon as the person is able to breathe 
air containing sufficient oxygen.

ICAO. The International Civil Aeronautical Organization.

Icebox rivet. A solid rivet made of 2017 or 2024 aluminum 
alloy. These rivets are too hard to drive in the condition they 
are received from the factory, and must be heat-treated to 
soften them. They are heated in a furnace and then quenched 
in cold water. Immediately after quenching they are soft, 
but within a few hours at room temperature they become 
quite hard. The hardening can be delayed for several days 
by storing them in a subfreezing icebox and holding them at 
this low temperature until they are to be used.

IFR. Instrument flight rules.

Inch-pound. A measure of work accomplished when a force 
of 1 pound moves an object a distance of 1 inch.

Indicated airspeed (IAS). The airspeed as shown on an 
airspeed indicator with no corrections applied.

Induced current. Electrical current produced in a conductor 
when it is moved through or crossed by a magnetic field.

Induced drag. Aerodynamic drag produced by an airfoil 
when it is producing lift. Induced drag is affected by the 
same factors that affect induced lift.

Induction time. The time allowed an epoxy or polyurethane 
material between its initial mixing and its application. This 
time allows the materials to begin their cure.


 G-20

Infrared radiation. Electromagnetic radiation whose 
wavelengths are longer than those of visible light.

Ingot. A large block of metal that was molded as it was 
poured from the furnace. Ingots are further processed into 
sheets, bars, tubes, or structural beams.

INS. Inertial Navigation System.

Inspection Authorization (IA). An authorization that may 
be issued to an experienced aviation maintenance technician 
who holds both an Airframe and Powerplant rating. It allows 
the holder to conduct annual inspections and to approve an 
aircraft or aircraft engine for return to service after a major 
repair or major alteration.

Integral fuel tank. A fuel tank which is formed by sealing 
off part of the aircraft structure and using it as a fuel tank. 
An integral wing tank is called a “wet wing.” Integral tanks 
are used because of their large weight saving. The only way 
of repairing an integral fuel tank is by replacing damaged 
sealant and making riveted repairs, as is done with any other 
part of the aircraft structure.

Interference drag. Parasite drag caused by air flowing over 
one portion of the airframe interfering with the smooth flow 
of air over another portion.

Intermittent-duty solenoid. A solenoid-type switch whose 
coil is designed for current to flow through it for only a 
short period of time. The coil will overheat if current flows 
through it too long.

IRS. Inertial Reference System.

IRU. Inertial Reference Unit.

Iso-octane. A hydrocarbon, C8H18, which has very high 
critical pressure and temperature. Iso-octane is used 
as the high reference for measuring the antidetonation 
characteristics of a fuel.

Isobaric mode. The mode of pressurization in which the 
cabin pressure is maintained at a constant value regardless 
of the outside air pressure.

Isogonic line. A line drawn on an aeronautical chart along 
which the angular difference between the magnetic and 
geographic north poles is the same.

Isopropyl alcohol. A colorless liquid used in the manufacture 
of acetone and its derivatives and as a solvent and anti-icing 
agent.

Jackscrew. A hardened steel rod with strong threads cut into 
it. A jackscrew is rotated by hand or with a motor to apply 
a force or to lift an object.

Jet pump. A special venturi in a line carrying air from certain 
areas in an aircraft that need an augmented flow of air through 
them. High-velocity compressor bleed air is blown into the 
throat of a venturi where it produces a low pressure that pulls 
air from the area to which it is connected. Jet pumps are often 
used in the lines that pull air through galleys and toilet areas.

Joggle. A small offset near the edge of a piece of sheet metal. 
It allows one sheet of metal to overlap another sheet while 
maintaining a flush surface.

Jointer. A woodworking power tool used to smooth edges 
of a piece of wood.

K-factor. A factor used in sheet metal work to determine the 
setback for other than a 90° bend. Setback = K ∙ (bend radius 
+ metal thickness). For bends of less than 90°, the value of 
K is less than 1; for bends greater than 90°, the value of K 
is greater than 1.

Kevlar. A patented synthetic aramid fiber noted for its 
flexibility and light weight. It is to a great extent replacing 
fiberglass as a reinforcing fabric for composite construction.

Key (verb). To initiate an action by depressing a key or a button.

kHz (kilohertz). 1,000 cycles per second.

Kick-in pressure. The pressure at which an unloading valve 
causes a hydraulic pump to direct its fluid into the system 
manifold.

Kick-out pressure. The pressure at which an unloading 
valve shuts off the flow of fluid into the system pressure 
manifold and directs it back to the reservoir under a much 
reduced pressure.

Kilogram. One thousand grams.

Kinetic energy. Energy that exists because of motion.

Knot (wood defect). A hard, usually round section of a 
tree branch embedded in a board. The grain of the knot is 
perpendicular to the grain of the board. Knots decrease the 
strength of the board and should be avoided where strength 
is needed.

Knot (measure of speed). A speed measurement that is 
equal to one nautical mile per hour. One knot is equal to 1.15 
statute mile per hour.


G-21

Kollsman window. The barometric scale window of a 
sensitive altimeter. See barometric scale.

Koroseal lacing. A plastic lacing material available in 
round or rectangular cross sections and used for holding 
wire bundles and tubing together. It holds tension on knots 
indefinitely and is impervious to petroleum products.

Kraft paper. A tough brown wrapping paper, like that used 
for paper bags.

Lacquer. A finishing material made of a film base, solvents, 
plasticizers, and thinners. The film base forms a tough film 
over the surface when it dries. The solvents dissolve the film 
base so it can be applied as a liquid. The plasticizers give 
the film base the needed resilience, and the thinners dilute 
the lacquer so it can be applied with a spray gun. Lacquer 
is sprayed on the surface as a liquid, and when the solvents 
and thinners evaporate, the film base remains as a tough 
decorative and protective coating.

Landing gear warning system. A system of lights used 
to indicate the condition of the landing gear. A red light 
illuminates when any of the gears are in an unsafe condition; a 
green light shows when all of the gears are down and locked, 
and no light is lit when the gears are all up and locked. An 
aural warning system is installed that sounds a horn if any of 
the landing gears are not down and locked when the throttles 
are retarded for landing.

Laminar flow. Airflow in which the air passes over the 
surface in smooth layers with a minimum of turbulence.

Laminated wood. A type of wood made by gluing several 
pieces of thin wood together. The grain of all pieces runs in 
the same direction.

Latent heat. Heat that is added to a material that causes a 
change in its state without changing its temperature.

Lateral axis. An imaginary line, passing through the center 
of gravity of an airplane, and extending across it from wing 
tip to wing tip.

Lay-up. The placement of the various layers of resin-
impregnated fabric in the mold for a piece of laminated 
composite material.

L/D ratio. A measure of efficiency of an airfoil. It is the 
ratio of the lift to the total drag at a specified angle of attack.

Left-right indicator. The course-deviation indicator used 
with a VOR navigation system.

Lightning hole. A hole cut in a piece of structural material to 
get rid of weight without losing any strength. A hole several 
inches in diameter may be cut in a piece of metal at a point 
where the metal is not needed for strength, and the edges of 
the hole are flanged to give it rigidity. A piece of metal with 
properly flanged lightning holes is more rigid than the metal 
before the holes were cut.

Linear actuator. A fluid power actuator that uses a piston 
moving inside a cylinder to change pressure into linear, or 
straight-line, motion.

Linear change. A change in which the output is directly 
proportional to the input.

Loadmeter. A current meter used in some aircraft electrical 
systems to show the amount of current the generator or 
alternator is producing. Loadmeters are calibrated in percent 
of the generator rated output.

Localizer. The portion of an ILS (Instrument Landing 
System) that directs the pilot along the center line of the 
instrument runway.

Lodestone. A magnetized piece of natural iron oxide.

Logic flow chart. A type of graphic chart that can be made 
up for a specific process or procedure to help follow the 
process through all of its logical steps.

Longitudinal axis. An imaginary line, passing through the 
center of gravity of an airplane, and extending lengthwise 
through it from nose to tail.

Longitudinal stability. Stability of an aircraft along its 
longitudinal axis and about its lateral axis. Longitudinal 
stability is also called pitch stability.

LORAN A. Long Range Aid to Navigation. A hyperbolic 
navigation system that operates with frequencies of 1,950 
kHz, 1,850 kHz, and 1,900 kHz.

LORAN C. The LORAN system used in aircraft. It operates 
on a frequency of 100 kHz.

LRU. Line replaceable unit.

Lubber line. A reference on a magnetic compass and 
directional gyro that represents the nose of the aircraft. The 
heading of the aircraft is shown on the compass card opposite 
the lubber line.


 G-22

Mach number. A measurement of speed based on the ratio 
of the speed of the aircraft to the speed of sound under the 
same atmospheric conditions. An airplane flying at Mach 1 
is flying at the speed of sound.

Magnetic bearing. The direction to or from a radio 
transmitting station measured relative to magnetic north.

Major alteration. An alteration not listed in the aircraft, 
aircraft engine, or propeller specifications. It is one that 
might appreciably affect weight, balance, structural strength 
performance, powerplant operation, flight characteristics, or 
other qualities affecting airworthiness, or that cannot be made 
with elementary operations.

Major repair. A repair to an aircraft structure or component 
that if improperly made might appreciably affect weight, 
balance, structural strength, performance, powerplant 
operation, flight characteristics, or other qualities affecting 
airworthiness, or that is not done according to accepted 
practices, or cannot be made with elementary operation.

Manifold cross-feed fuel system. A type of fuel system 
commonly used in large transport category aircraft. All fuel 
tanks feed into a common manifold, and the dump chutes and 
the single-point fueling valves are connected to the manifold. 
Fuel lines to each engine are taken from the manifold.

Manifold pressure. The absolute pressure of the air in the 
induction system of a reciprocating engine.

Manifold pressure gauge. A pressure gauge that measures 
the absolute pressure inside the induction system of a 
reciprocating engine. When the engine is not operating, this 
instrument shows the existing atmospheric pressure.

Master switch. A switch in an aircraft electrical system 
that can disconnect the battery from the bus and open the 
generator or alternator field circuit.

Matrix. The material used in composite construction to bond 
the fibers together and to transmit the forces into the fibers. 
Resins are the most widely used matrix materials.

Mean camber. A line that is drawn midway between the upper 
and lower camber of an airfoil section. The mean camber 
determines the aerodynamic characteristics of the airfoil.

MEK. Methyl-ethyl-ketone is an organic chemical solvent 
that is soluble in water and is used as a solvent for vinyl and 
nitrocellulose films. MEK is an efficient cleaner for preparing 
surfaces for priming or painting.

Mercerize. A treatment given to cotton thread to make it 
strong and lustrous. The thread is stretched while it is soaked 
in a solution of caustic soda.

MFD. Multi-function display.

MHz (megahertz). 1,000,000 cycles per second.

Microballoons. Tiny, hollow spheres of glass or phenolic 
material used to add body to a resin.

Microbial contaminants. The scum that forms inside the 
fuel tanks of turbine-engine-powered aircraft that is caused 
by micro-organisms. These micro-organisms live in water 
that condenses from fuel, and they feed on the fuel. The 
scum they form clogs fuel filters, lines, and fuel controls and 
holds water in contact with the aluminum alloy structure, 
causing corrosion.

Micro-Mesh. A patented graduated series of cloth-backed 
cushioned seats that contain abrasive crystals. Micro-Mesh 
is used for polishing and restoring transparency to acrylic 
plastic windows and windshields.

Micron (“micro meter”). A unit of linear measurement 
equal to one millionth of a meter, one thousandth of a 
millimeter, or 0.000039 inch. A micron is also called a 
micrometer.

Micronic filter. The registered trade name of a type of fluid 
filter whose filtering element is a specially treated cellulose 
paper formed into vertical convolutions, or wrinkles. 
Micronic filters prevent the passage of solids larger than 
about 10 microns, and are normally replaced with new filters 
rather than cleaned.

Micro-organism. An organism, normally bacteria or fungus, 
or microscopic size.

Microswitch. The registered trade name for a precision 
switch that uses a short throw of the control plunger to 
actuate the contacts. Microswitches are used primarily as 
limit switches to control electrical units automatically.

MIG welding. Metal inert gas welding is a form of electric 
arc welding in which the electrode is an expendable wire. 
MIG welding is now called GMA (gas metal arc) welding.

Mil. One thousandth of an inch (0.001 inch). Paint film 
thickness is usually measured in mils.

Mildew. A gray or white fungus growth that forms on organic 
materials. Mildew forms on cotton and linen aircraft fabric 
and destroys its strength.


G-23

Millivoltmeter. An electrical instrument that measures 
voltage in units of millivolts (thousandths of a volt).

Mist coat. A very light coat of zinc chromate primer. It is 
so thin that the metal is still visible, but the primer makes 
pencil marks easy to see.

Moisture separator. A component in a high-pressure 
pneumatic system that removes most of the water vapor 
from the compressed air. When the compressed air is used, 
its pressure drops, and this pressure drop causes a drop in 
temperature. If any moisture were allowed to remain in the 
air, it would freeze and block the system.

Mold line. A line used in the development of a flat pattern for 
a formed piece of sheet metal. The mold line is an extension 
of the flat side of a part beyond the radius. The mold line 
dimension of a part is the dimension made to the intersection 
of mold lines and is the dimension the part would have if its 
corners had no radius.

Mold point. The intersection of two mold lines of a part. 
Mold line dimensions are made between mold points.

Moment. A force that causes or tries to cause an object to 
rotate. The value of a moment is the product of the weight of 
an object (or the force), multiplied by the distance between 
the center of gravity of the object (or the point of application 
of the force) and the fulcrum about which the object rotates.

Monel. An alloy of nickel, copper, and aluminum or silicon.

Monocoque. A single-shell type of aircraft structure in 
which all of the flight loads are carried in the outside skin 
of the structure.

MSDS. Material Safety Data Sheets. MSDS are required 
by the Federal Government to be available in workplaces to 
inform workers of the dangers that may exist from contact 
with certain materials.

MSL. Mean sea level. When the letters MSL are used with 
an altitude, it means that the altitude is measured from mean, 
or average, sea level.

MTBF. Mean time between failures.

Multimeter. An electrical test instrument that consists 
of a single current-measuring meter and all of the needed 
components to allow the meter to be used to measure voltage, 
resistance, and current. Multimeters are available with either 
analog-or digital-type displays.

Multiple-disk brakes. Aircraft brakes in which one set of 
disks is keyed to the axle and remains stationary. Between 
each stationary disk there is a rotating disk that is keyed to 
the inside of the wheel. When the brakes are applied, the 
stationary disks are forced together, clamping the rotating 
disks between them. The friction between the disks slows 
the aircraft.

Nailing strip. A method of applying pressure to the glue in a 
scarf joint repair in a plywood skin. A strip of thin plywood is 
nailed over the glued scarf joint with the nails extending into 
a supporting structure beneath the skin. The strip is installed 
over vinyl sheeting to prevent it sticking to the skin. When 
the glue is thoroughly dry, the nailing strip is broken away 
and the nails removed.

Nap of the fabric. The ends of the fibers in a fabric. The first 
coat of dope on cotton or linen fabric raises the nap, and the 
fiber ends stick up. These ends must be carefully removed 
by sanding to get a smooth finish.

Naphtha. A volatile and flammable hydrocarbon liquid used 
chiefly as a solvent or as a cleaning fluid.

NDB. Non-directional beacons.

Negative pressure relief valve (pressurization component). 
A valve that opens anytime the outside air pressure is greater 
than the cabin pressure. It prevents the cabin altitude from 
ever becoming greater than the aircraft flight altitude.

Neutral axis (neutral plane). A line through a piece of 
material that is bent. The material in the outside of the bend 
is stretched and that on the inside of the bend is shrunk. The 
material along the neutral plane is neither shrunk nor stretched.

Neutral flame. An oxyacetylene flame produced when the 
ratio of oxygen and acetylene is chemically correct and 
there is no excess of oxygen or carbon. A neutral flame has 
a rounded inner cone and no feather around it.

Noise (electrical). An unwanted electrical signal within a 
piece of electronic equipment.

Nomex. A patented nylon material used to make the 
honeycomb core for certain types of sandwich materials. 

Nonenergizing brake. A brake that does not use the 
momentum of the aircraft to increase the friction.

Nonvolatile memory. Memory in a computer that is not lost 
when power to the computer is lost.


 G-24

Normal heptane. A hydrocarbon, C7H16, with a very 
low critical pressure and temperature. Normal heptane is 
used as the low reference in measuring the anti-detonation 
characteristics of a fuel.

Normal shock wave. A shock wave that forms ahead of a 
blunt object moving through the air at the speed of sound. The 
shock wave is normal (perpendicular) to the air approaching 
the object. Air passing through a normal shock wave is 
slowed to a subsonic speed and its static pressure is increased.

Normalizing. A process of strain-relieving steel that has been 
welded and left in a strained condition. The steel is heated to 
a specified temperature, usually red hot, and allowed to cool 
in still air to room temperature.

Nose-gear centering cam. A cam in the nose-gear shock strut 
that causes the piston to center when the strut fully extends. 
When the aircraft takes off and the strut extends, the wheel is 
straightened in its fore-and-aft position so it can be retracted 
into the wheel well.

NPN transistor. A bipolar transistor made of a thin base of 
P-type silicon or geranium sandwiched between a collector 
and an emitter, both of which are made of N-type material.

Null position. The position of an ADF loop antenna when 
the signal being received is canceled in the two sides of the 
loop and the signal strength is the weakest.

Oblique shock wave. A shock wave that forms on a sharp-
pointed object moving through air at a speed greater than the 
speed of sound. Air passing through an oblique shock wave 
is slowed down, but not to a subsonic speed, and its static 
pressure is increased.

Oleo shock absorber. A shock absorber used on aircraft 
landing gear. The initial landing impact is absorbed by oil 
transferring from one compartment in the shock strut into 
another compartment through a metering orifice. The shocks 
of taxiing are taken up by a cushion of compressed air.

Octane rating. A rating of the anti-detonation characteristics 
of a reciprocating engine fuel. It is based on the performance 
of the fuel in a special test engine. When a fuel is given a dual 
rating such as 80/87, the first number is its anti-detonating 
rating with a lean fuel-air mixture, and the higher number is 
its rating with a rich mixture.

Open angle. An angle in which sheet metal is bent less than 90°.

Open assembly time. The period of time between the application 
of the glue and the assembly of the joint components.

Open-hydraulic system. A fluid power system in which the 
selector valves are arranged in series with each other. Fluid 
flows from the pump through the center of the selector valves, 
back into the reservoir when no unit is being actuated.

Open-center selector valve. A type of selector valve that 
functions as an unloading valve as well as a selector valve. 
Open-center selector valves are installed in series, and when 
no unit is actuated, fluid from the pump flows through the 
centers of all the valves and returns to the reservoir. When 
a unit is selected for actuation, the center of the selector 
valve is shut off and the fluid from the pump goes through 
the selector valve into one side of the actuator. Fluid from 
the other side of the actuator returns to the valve and goes 
back to the reservoir through the other selector valves. When 
the actuation is completed, the selector valve is placed in its 
neutral position. Its center opens, and fluid from the pump 
flows straight through the valve.

Open wiring. An electrical wiring installation in which the 
wires are tied together in bundles and clamped to the aircraft 
structure rather than being enclosed in conduit.

Orifice check valve. A component in a hydraulic or 
pneumatic system that allows unrestricted flow in one 
direction, and restricted flow in the opposite direction.

O-ring. A widely used type of seal made in the form of a 
rubber ring with a round cross section. An O-ring seals in 
both directions, and it can be used as a packing or a gasket.

Ornithopter. A heavier-than-air flying machine that 
produces lift by flapping its wings. No practical ornithopter 
has been built.

Oscilloscope. An electrical instrument that displays on the 
face of a cathode-ray tube the waveform of the electrical 
signal it is measuring.

Outflow valve (pressurization component). A valve in the 
cabin of a pressurized aircraft that controls the cabin pressure 
by opening to relieve all pressure above that for which the 
cabin pressure control is set.

Overvoltage protector. A component in an aircraft electrical 
system that opens the alternator field circuit any time the 
alternator output voltage is too high.

Oxidizing flame. An oxyacetylene flame in which there is 
an excess of oxygen. The inner cone is pointed and often a 
hissing sound is heard.


G-25

Ozone. An unstable form of oxygen produced when an 
electric spark passes through the air. Ozone is harmful to 
rubber products.

Packing. A seal between two parts where there is relative motion.

Paint. A covering applied to an object or structure to protect 
it and improve its appearance. Paint consists of a pigment 
suspended in a vehicle such as oil or water. When the vehicle 
dries by evaporation or curing, the pigment is left as a film 
on the surface.

Parabolic reflector. A reflector whose surface is made in 
the form of a parabola.

Parallel circuit. A method of connecting electrical 
components so that each component is in a path between the 
terminals of the source of electrical energy.

Paralleling circuit. A circuit in a multi-engine aircraft 
electrical system that controls a flow of control current 
which is used to keep the generators or alternators sharing 
the electrical load equally. The relay opens automatically to 
shut off the flow of paralleling current any time the output 
of either alternator or generator drops to zero.

Paralleling relay. A relay in multi-engine aircraft electrical 
system that controls a flow of control current which is used to 
keep the generators or alternators sharing the electrical load 
equally. The relay opens automatically to shut off the flow 
of paralleling current any time the output of either alternator 
or generator drops to zero.

Parasite drag. A form of aerodynamic drag caused by friction 
between the air and the surface over which it is flowing.

Parent metal. The metal being welded. This term is used 
to distinguish between the metal being welded and the 
welding rod.

Partial pressure. The percentage of the total pressure of a 
mixture of gases produced by each of the individual gases 
in the mixture.

Parting film. A layer of thin plastic material placed between 
a composite lay-up and the heating blanket. It prevents the 
blanket from sticking to the fabric.

Pascal’s Law. A basic law of fluid power which states that 
the pressure in an enclosed container is transmitted equally 
and undiminished to all points of the container, and the force 
acts at right angles to the enclosing walls.

Performance number. The anti-detonation rating of a fuel 
that has a higher critical pressure and temperature than iso-
octane (a rating of 100). Iso-octane that has been treated with 
varying amounts of tetraethyl lead is used as the reference fuel.

Petrolatum-zinc dust compound. A special abrasive 
compound used inside an aluminum wire terminal being 
swaged onto a piece of aluminum electrical wire. When the 
terminal is compressed, the zinc dust abrades the oxides from 
the wire, and the petrolatum prevents oxygen reaching the 
wire so no more oxides can form.

Petroleum fractions. The various components of a 
hydrocarbon fuel that are separated by boiling them off at 
different temperatures in the process of fractional distillation. 

Phased array antenna. A complex antenna which consists 
of a number of elements. A beam of energy is formed by the 
superimposition of the signals radiating from the elements. 
The direction of the beam can be changed by varying the 
relative phase of the signals applied to each of the elements.

Phenolic plastic. A plastic material made of a thermosetting 
phenol-formaldehyde resin, reinforced with cloth or paper. 
Phenolic plastic materials are used for electrical insulators 
and for chemical-resistant table tops.

Pilot hole. A small hole punched or drilled in a piece of sheet 
metal to locate a rivet hole.

Pin knot cluster. A group of knots, all having a diameter of 
less than approximately 1⁄16 inch.

Pinked-edge tape. Cloth tape whose edges have small 
V-shaped notches cut along their length. The pinked edges 
prevent the tape from raveling.

Pinking shears. Shears used to cut aircraft fabric with a 
series of small notches along the cut edge.

Pinion. A small gear that meshes with a larger gear, a sector 
of a gear, or a toothed rack.

Piston. A sliding plug in an actuating cylinder used to convert 
pressure into force and then into work.

Pitch (aircraft maneuver). Rotation of an aircraft about 
its lateral axis.

Pitch (rivet). The distance between the centers of adjacent 
rivets installed in the small row.


 G-26

Pitch pocket (wood defect). Pockets of pitch that appear in 
the growth rings of a piece of wood.

Pitot pressure. Ram air pressure used to measure airspeed. 
The pitot tube faces directly into the air flowing around the 
aircraft. It stops the air and measures its pressure.

Plain-weave fabric. Fabric in which each warp thread passes 
over one fill thread and under the next. Plain-weave fabric 
typically has the same strength in both warp and fill directions.

Plan position indicator (PPI). A type of radar scope that 
shows both the direction and distance of the target from the 
radar antenna. Some radar antenna rotate and their PPI scopes 
are circular. Other antenna oscillate and their PPI scopes are 
fan shaped.

Planer. A woodworking power tool used to smooth the 
surfaces of a piece of wood.

Plasticizer. A constituent in dope or lacquer that gives its 
film flexibility and resilience.

Plastic media blasting (PMB). A method of removing paint 
from an aircraft surface by dry-blasting it with tiny plastic beads.

Plastics. The generic name for any of the organic materials 
produced by polymerization. Plastics can be shaped by 
molding or drawing.

Plenum. An enclosed chamber in which air can be held at a 
pressure higher than that of the surrounding air.

Ply rating. The rating of an aircraft tire that indicates its 
relative strength. The ply rating does not indicate the actual 
number of plies of fabric in the tire; it indicates the number 
of piles of cotton fabric needed to produce the same strength 
as the actual piles.

Plywood. A wood product made by gluing several pieces 
of thin wood veneer together. The grain of the wood in each 
layer runs at 90° or 45° to the grain of the layer next to it.

Pneumatics. The system of fluid power which transmits 
force by the use of a compressible fluid.

PNP transistor. A bipolar transistor made of a thin base of 
N-type silicon or germanium sandwiched between a collector 
and an emitter, both of which are made of P-type material.

Polyester fibers. A synthetic fiber made by the polymerization 
process in which tiny molecules are united to form a long chain 
of molecules. Polyester fibers are woven into fabrics that are 
known by their trade names of Dacron, Fortrel, and Kodel. 
Polyester film and sheet are known as Mylar and Celenar.

Polyester resin. A thermosetting resin used as a matrix for 
much of the fiberglass used in composite construction.

Polyurethane enamel. A hard, chemically resistant finish 
used on aircraft. Polyurethane enamel is resistant to damage 
from all types of hydraulic fluid.

Polyvinyl chloride. A thermoplastic resin used in the 
manufacture of transparent tubing for electrical insulation 
and fluid lines which are subject to low pressures.

Position error. The error in pitot-static instruments caused by 
the static ports not sensing true static air pressure. Position error 
changes with airspeed and is usually greatest at low airspeeds.

Potential energy. Energy possessed in an object because of 
its position, chemical composition, shape, or configuration.

Potentiometer. A variable resistor having connections to 
both ends of the resistance element and to the wiper that 
moves across the resistance.

Pot life. The length of time a resin will remain workable 
after the catalyst has been added. If a catalyzed material is 
not used within its usable pot life, it must be discarded and 
a new batch mixed up.

Power. The time rate of doing work. Power is force 
multiplied by distance (work), divided by time.

Power brakes. Aircraft brakes that use the main hydraulic 
system to supply fluid for the brake actuation. Aircraft that 
require a large amount of fluid for their brake actuation 
normally use power brakes, and the volume of fluid sent to 
the brakes is increased by the use of deboosters.

Power control valve. A hand-operated hydraulic pump 
unloading valve. When the valve is open, fluid flows from the 
pump to the reservoir with little opposition. To actuate a unit, turn 
the selector valve, and manually close the power control valve. 
Pressurized fluid flows to the unit, and when it is completely 
actuated, the power control valve automatically opens.

Precession. The characteristic of a gyroscope that causes a 
force to be felt, not at the point of application, but at a point 
90° in the direction of rotation from that point.


G-27

Preflight inspection. A required inspection to determine the 
condition of the aircraft for the flight to be conducted. It is 
conducted by the pilot-in-command.

Precipitation heat treatment. A method of increasing 
the strength of heat-treated aluminum alloy. After the 
aluminum alloy has been solution-heat-treated by heating 
and quenching, it is returned to the oven and heated to a 
temperature lower than that used for the initial heat treatment. 
It is held at this temperature for a specified period of time, 
and then removed from the oven and allowed to cool slowly.

Prepreg (preimpregnated fabric). A type of composite 
material in which the reinforcing fibers are encapsulated in 
an uncured resin. Prepreg materials must be kept refrigerated 
to prevent them from curing before they are used.

Press-to-test light fixture. An indicator light fixture whose 
lens can be pressed in to complete a circuit that tests the 
filament of the light bulb.

Pressure. Force per unit area. Hydraulic and pneumatic pressure 
are normally given in units of pounds per square inch (psi).

Pressure altitude. The altitude in standard air at which the 
pressure is the same as that of the existing air. Pressure altitude 
is read on an altimeter when the barometric scale is set to the 
standard sea level pressure of 29.92 inches of mercury.

Pressure-demand oxygen system. A type of oxygen system 
used by aircraft that fly at very high altitude. This system 
functions as a diluter-demand system until, at about 40,000 
feet, the output to the mask is pressurized enough to force the 
needed oxygen into the lungs, rather than depending on the 
low pressure produced when the wearer of the mask inhales 
to pull in the oxygen. (See diluter-demand oxygen system.)

Pressure fueling. The method of fueling used by almost all 
transport aircraft. The fuel is put into the aircraft through 
a single underwing fueling port. The fuel tanks are filled 
to the desired quantity and in the sequence selected by the 
person conducting the fueling operation. Pressure fueling 
saves servicing time by using a single point to fuel the entire 
aircraft, and it reduces the chances for fuel contamination.

Pressure manifold (hydraulic system component). The 
portion of a fluid power system from which the selector 
valves receive their pressurized fluid.

Pressure plate (brake component). A strong, heavy plate 
used in a multiple-disk brake. The pressure plate receives 
the force from the brake cylinders and transmits this force 
to the disks.

Pressure reducing valve (oxygen system component). 
A valve used in an oxygen system to change high cylinder 
pressure to low system pressure.

Pressure relief valve (oxygen system component). A valve 
in an oxygen system that relieves the pressure if the pressure 
reducing valve should fail.

Pressure vessel. The strengthened portion of an aircraft 
structure that is sealed and pressurized in flight.

Primer (finishing system component). A component in 
a finishing system that provides a good bond between the 
surface and the material used for the topcoats.

Profile drag. Aerodynamic drag produced by skin friction. 
Profile drag is a form of parasite drag.

Progressive inspection. An inspection that may be used in 
place of an annual or 100-hour inspection. It has the same 
scope as an annual inspection, but it may be performed in 
increments so the aircraft will not have to be out of service 
for a lengthy period of time.

Pump control valve. A control valve in a hydraulic system that 
allows the pilot to manually direct the output of the hydraulic 
pump back to the reservoir when no unit is being actuated.

Pureclad. A registered trade name for clad aluminum alloy.

Purge (air conditioning system operation). To remove all 
of the moisture and air from a cooling system by flushing 
the system with a dry gaseous refrigerant.

Pusher powerplant. A powerplant whose propeller is 
mounted at the rear of the airplane and pushes, rather than 
pulls, the airplane through the air.

PVC (Polyvinylchloride). A thermoplastic resin used to 
make transparent tubing for insulating electrical wires.

Quartersawed wood. Wood sawed from a tree in such a 
way that the annual rings cross the plank at an angle greater 
than 45°.

Quick-disconnect fitting. A hydraulic line fitting that seals the 
line when the fitting is disconnected. Quick-disconnect fittings 
are used on the lines connected to the engine-driven hydraulic 
pump. They allow the pump to be disconnected and an auxiliary 
hydraulic power system connected to perform checks requiring 
hydraulic power while the aircraft is in the hangar.


 G-28

Rack-and-pinion actuator. A form of rotary actuator where 
the fluid acts on a piston on which a rack of gear teeth is cut. 
As the piston moves, it rotates a pinion gear which is mated 
with the teeth cut in the rack.

Radial. A directional line radiating outward from a radio 
facility, usually a VOR. When an aircraft is flying outbound 
on the 330º from the station.

Radius dimpling. A process of preparing a hole in sheet 
metal for flush riveting. A cone-shaped male die forces the 
edges of the rivet hole into the depression in a female die. 
Radius dimpling forms a round-edged depression into which 
the rivet head fits.

Range markings. Colored marks on an instrument dial 
that identify certain ranges of operation as specified in 
the aircraft maintenance or flight manual and listed in the 
appropriate aircraft Type Certificate Data Sheets or Aircraft 
Specifications. Color coding directs attention to approaching 
operating difficulties. Airspeed indicators and most pressure 
and temperature indicators are marked to show the various 
ranges of operation. These ranges and colors are the most 
generally used: Red radial line, do not exceed. Green arc, 
normal operating range. Yellow arc, caution range. Blue 
radial line, used on airspeed indicators to show best single-
engine rate of climb speed. White arc, used on airspeed 
indicators to show flap operating range.

RDF. Radio direction finding.

Rebreather oxygen mask. A type of oxygen mask used 
with a continuous flow oxygen system. Oxygen continuously 
flows into the bottom of the loose-fitting rebreather bag on 
the mask. The wearer of the mask exhales into the top of 
the bag. The first air exhaled contains some oxygen, and 
this air goes into the bag first. The last air to leave the lungs 
contains little oxygen, and it is forced out of the bag as the 
bag is filled with fresh oxygen. Each time the wearer of the 
mask inhales, the air first exhaled, along with fresh oxygen, 
is taken into the lungs.

Receiver-dryer. The component in a vapor-cycle cooling 
system that serves as a reservoir for the liquid refrigerant. 
The receiver-dryer contains a desiccant that absorbs any 
moisture that may be in the system.

Rectangle. A plane surface with four sides whose opposite 
sides are parallel and whose angles are all right angles.

Rectification (arc welding condition). A condition in AC-
electric arc welding in which oxides on the surface of the 
metal act as a rectifier and prevent electrons flowing from 
the metal to the electrode during the half cycle when the 
electrode is positive.

Reducing flame. See carburizing flame.

Reed valve. A thin, leaf-type valve mounted in the valve 
plate of an air conditioning compressor to control the flow 
of refrigerant gases into and out of the compressor cylinders.

Reinforcing tape. A narrow strip of woven fabric material 
placed over the fabric as it is being attached to the aircraft 
structure with rib lacing cord. This tape carries a large amount 
of the load and prevents the fabric tearing at the stitches.

Rejuvenator. A finishing material used to restore resilience 
to an old dope film. Rejuvenator contains strong solvents to 
open the dried-out film and plasticizers to restore resilience 
to the old dope.

Relative wind. The direction the wind strikes an airfoil.

Relay. An electrical component which uses a small amount 
of current flowing through a coil to produce a magnetic pull 
to close a set of contacts through which a large amount of 
current can flow. The core in a relay coil is fixed.

Relief hole. A hole drilled at the point at which two bend 
lines meet in a piece of sheet metal. This hole spreads the 
stresses caused by the bends and prevents the metal cracking.

Relief valve. A pressure-control valve that relieves any 
pressure over the amount for which it is set. They are damage-
preventing units used in both hydraulic and pneumatic 
systems. In an aircraft hydraulic system, pressure relief valves 
prevent damaging high pressures that could be caused by a 
malfunctioning pressure regulator, or by thermal expansion 
of fluid trapped in portions of the system.

Repair. A maintenance procedure in which a damaged 
component is restored to its original condition, or at least to 
a condition that allows it to fulfill its design function.

Restrictor. A fluid power system component that controls 
the rate of actuator movement by restricting the flow of fluid 
into or out of the actuator.

Retard breaker points. A set of breaker points in certain 
aircraft magnetos that are used to provide a late (retarded) 
spark for starting the engine.


G-29

Retarder (finishing system component). Dope thinner that 
contains certain additives that slow its rate of evaporation 
enough to prevent dope blushing.

Retread. The replacement of the tread rubber on an aircraft tire.

Retreating blade. The blade on a helicopter rotor whose 
tip is moving in the direction opposite to that in which the 
helicopter is moving.

Retreating blade stall. The stall of a helicopter rotor disc 
that occurs near the tip of the retreating blade. A retreating 
blade stall occurs when the flight airspeed is high and the 
retreating blade airspeed is low. This results in a high angle 
of attack, causing the stall.

Return manifold. The portion of a fluid power system 
through which the fluid is returned to the reservoir.

Reverse polarity welding. DC-electric arc welding in which 
the electrode is positive with respect to the work.

Rib thread. A series of circumferential grooves cut into the 
tread of a tire. This tread pattern provides superior traction 
and directional stability on hard-surfaced runways.

Ribbon direction. The direction in a piece of honeycomb 
material that is parallel to the length of the strips of material 
that make up the core.

Rigid conduit. Aluminum alloy tubing used to house electrical 
wires in areas where they are subject to mechanical damage.

Rigidity in space. The characteristic of a gyroscope that 
prevents its axis of rotation tilting as the earth rotates. This 
characteristic is used for attitude gyro instruments.

Rime ice. A rough ice that forms on aircraft flying through 
visible moisture, such as a cloud, when the temperature is 
below freezing. Rime ice disturbs the smooth airflow as well 
as adding weight.

Rivet cutters. Special cutting pliers that resemble diagonal 
cutters except that the jaws are ground in such a way that 
they cut the rivet shank, or stem, off square.

Rivet set. A tool used to drive aircraft solid rivets. It is a piece 
of hardened steel with a recess the shape of the rivet head in 
one end. The other end fits into the rivet gun.

RMI. Radio magnetic indicator.

Rocking shaft. A shaft used in the mechanism of a pressure 
measuring instrument to change the direction of movement 
by 90º and to amplify the amount of movement.

Roll (aircraft maneuver). Rotation of an aircraft about its 
longitudinal axis.

Roots-type air compressor. A positive-displacement air 
pump that uses two intermeshing figure-8-shaped rotors to 
move the air.

Rosette weld. A method of securing one metal tube inside 
another by welding. Small holes are drilled in the outer tube 
and the inner tube is welded to it around the circumference 
of the holes.

Rotary actuator. A fluid power actuator whose output is 
rotational. A hydraulic motor is a rotary actuator.

Roving. A lightly twisted roll or strand of fibers.

RPM. Revolutions per minute.

Ruddervators. The two movable surfaces on a V-tail 
empennage. When these two surfaces are moved together 
with the in-and-out movement of the control yoke, they act 
as elevators, and when they are moved differentially with the 
rudder pedals, they act as the rudder.

Saddle gusset. A piece of plywood glued to an aircraft 
structural member. The saddle gusset has a cutout to hold a 
backing block or strip tightly against the skin to allow a nailing 
strip to be used to apply pressure to a glued joint in the skin.

Sailplane. A high-performance glider.

Sandwich material. A type of composite structural material 
in which a core material is bonded between face sheets of 
metal or resin-impregnated fabric.

Satin-weave fabric. Fabric in which the warp threads pass 
under one fill thread and over several others. Satin-weave 
fabrics are used when the lay-up must be made over complex 
shapes.

Scarf joint. A joint in a wood structure in which the ends to 
be joined are cut in a long taper, normally about 12:1, and 
fastened together by gluing. A glued scarf joint makes a 
strong splice because the joint is made along the side of the 
wood fibers rather than along their ends.


 G-30

Schematic diagram. A diagram of an electrical system in 
which the system components are represented by symbols 
rather than drawings or pictures of the actual devices.

Schrader valve. A type of service valve used in an air 
conditioning system. This is a spring-loaded valve much like 
the valve used to put air into a tire.

Scissors. A name commonly used for torque links. See 
torque links.

Scrim cloth. Scrim cloth  can be used in repair applications 
or for reinforcement of other types of materials including 
fiberglass, concrete and some plastics. When fully cured, the 
scrim cloth will add reinforcement and mimic the expansion 
and contraction of the surrounding substrate. 

Scupper. A recess around the filler neck of an aircraft fuel 
tank. Any fuel spilled when the tank is being serviced collects 
in the scupper and drains to the ground through a drain line 
rather than flowing into the aircraft structure.

Sea level engine. A reciprocating engine whose rated takeoff 
power can be produced only at sea level.

Sector gear. A part of a gear wheel containing the hub and 
a portion of the rim with teeth.

Series circuit. A method of connecting electrical components 
in such a way that all the current flows through each of the 
components. There is only one path for current to flow.

Series-parallel circuit. An electrical circuit in which some 
of the components are connected in parallel and others are 
connected in series.

Selcal system. Selective calling system. Each aircraft 
operated by an airline is assigned a particular four-tone 
audio combination for identification purposes. A ground 
station keys the signal whenever contact with that particular 
aircraft is desired. The signal is decoded by the airborne selcal 
decoder and the crew alerted by the selcal warning system.

Selsyn system. A DC synchro system used in remote 
indicating instruments. The rotor in the indicator is a 
permanent magnet and the stator is a tapped toroidal coil. 
The transmitter is a circular potentiometer with DC power fed 
into its wiper which is moved by the object being monitored. 
The transmitter is connected to the indicator in such a way 
that rotation of the transmitter shaft varies the current in the 
sections of the indicator toroidal coil. The magnet in the 
indicator on which the pointer is mounted locks with the 
magnetic field produced by the coils and follows the rotation 
of the transmitter shaft.

Segmented-rotor brake. A heavy-duty, multiple-disk brake 
used on large, high-speed aircraft. Stators that are surfaced 
with a material that retains its friction characteristics at high 
temperatures are keyed to the axle. Rotors which are keyed 
into the wheels mesh with the stators. The rotors are made 
in segments to allow for cooling and for their large amounts 
of expansion.

Selector valve. A flow control valve used in hydraulic 
systems that directs pressurized fluid into one side of an 
actuator, and at the same time directs return fluid from the 
other side of the actuator back to the reservoir. There are 
two basic types of selector valves: open-center valves and 
closed-center valves. The four-port closed-center valve is the 
most frequently used type. See closed-center selector valve 
and open-center selector valve.

Selvage edge. The woven edge of fabric used to prevent the 
material unraveling during normal handling. The selvage 
edge, which runs the length of the fabric parallel to the warp 
threads, is usually removed from materials used in composite 
construction.

Semiconductor diode. A two-element electrical component 
that allows current to pass through it in one direction, but 
blocks its passage in the opposite direction. A diode acts in 
an electrical system in the same way a check valve acts in a 
hydraulic system.

Semimonocoque structure. A form of aircraft stressed skin 
structure. Most of the strength of a semimonocoque structure 
is in the skin, but the skin is supported on a substructure of 
formers and stringers that give the skin its shape and increase 
its rigidity.

Sensible heat. Heat that is added to a liquid causing a change 
in its temperature but not its physical state.

Sensitivity. A measure of the signal strength needed to 
produce a distortion-free output in a radio receiver.

Sequence valve. A valve in a hydraulic system that requires 
a certain action to be completed before another action 
can begin. Sequence valves are used to assure that the 
hydraulically actuated wheel-well doors are completely open 
before pressure is directed to the landing gear to lower it.

Servo. An electrical or hydraulic actuator connected into a 
flight control system. A small force on the flight deck control 
is amplified by the servo and provides a large force to move 
the control surface.


G-31

Servo amplifier. An electronic amplifier in an autopilot 
system that increases the signal from the autopilot enough 
that it can operate the servos that move the control surfaces.

Servo tab. A small movable tab built into the trailing edge 
of a primary control surface of an airplane. The flight deck 
controls move the tab in such a direction that it produces an 
aerodynamic force moving the surface on which it is mounted.

Setback. The distance the jaws of a brake must be set back 
from the mold line to form a bend. Setback for a 90° bend 
is equal to the inside radius of the bend plus the thickness of 
the metal being bent. For a bend other than 90°, a K-factor 
must be used. See also K-factor.

Shake (wood defect). Longitudinal cracks in a piece of wood, 
usually between two annual rings.

SHF. Super-high frequency.

Shear section. A necked-down section of the drive shaft of a 
constant-displacement engine-driven fluid pump. If the pump 
should seize, the shear section will break and prevent the pump 
from being destroyed or the engine from being damaged. Some 
pumps use a shear pin rather than a shear section.

Shear strength. The strength of a riveted joint in a sheet 
metal structure in which the rivets shear before the metal 
tears at the rivet holes.

Shelf life. The length of time a product is good when it 
remains in its original unopened container.

Shielded wire. Electrical wire enclosed in a braided metal 
jacket. Electromagnetic energy radiated from the wire is 
trapped by the braid and is carried to ground.

Shimmy. Abnormal, and often violent, vibration of the 
nose wheel of an airplane. Shimmying is usually caused 
by looseness of the nose wheel support mechanism or an 
unbalanced wheel.

Shimmy damper. A small hydraulic shock absorber installed 
between the nose wheel fork and the nose wheel cylinder 
attached to the aircraft structure.

Shock mounts. Resilient mounting pads used to protect 
electronic equipment by absorbing low-frequency, high 
amplitude vibrations.

Shock wave. A pressure wave formed in the air by a flight 
vehicle moving at a speed greater than the speed of sound. As 
the vehicle passes through the air, it produces sound waves 
that spread out in all directions. But since the vehicle is flying 
faster than these waves are moving, they build up and form a 
pressure wave at the front and rear of the vehicle. As the air 
passes through a shock wave it slows down, its static pressure 
increases, and its total energy decreases.

Shop head. The head of a rivet which is formed when the 
shank is upset.

Show-type finish. The type of finish put on fabric-covered 
aircraft intended for show. This finish is usually made up of 
many coats of dope, with much sanding and rubbing of the 
surface between coats.

Shunt winding. Field coils in an electric motor or generator 
that are connected in parallel with the armature.

Shuttle valve. An automatic selector valve mounted on 
critical components such as landing gear actuation cylinders 
and brake cylinders. For normal operation, system fluid flows 
into the actuator through the shuttle valve, but if normal 
system pressure is lost, emergency system pressure forces 
the shuttle over and emergency fluid flows into the actuator.

Sidestick controller. A flight deck flight control used on 
some of the fly-by-wire equipped airplanes. The stick is 
mounted rigidly on the side console of the flight deck, and 
pressures exerted on the stick by the pilot produce electrical 
signals that are sent to the computer that flies the airplane.

Sight glass (air conditioning system component). A small 
window in the high side of a vapor-cycle cooling system. 
Liquid refrigerant flows past the sight glass, and if the charge 
of refrigerant is low, bubbles will be seen. A fully charged 
system has no bubbles in the refrigerant.

Sight line. A line drawn on a sheet metal layout that is one 
bend radius from the bend-tangent line. The sight line is 
lined up directly below the nose of the radius bar in a cornice 
brake. When the metal is clamped in this position, the bend 
tangent line is in the correct position for the start of the bend.

Silicon controlled rectifier (SCR). A semiconductor 
electron control device. An SCR blocks current flow in 
both directions until a pulse of positive voltage is applied 
to its gate. It then conducts in its forward direction, while 
continuing to block current in its reverse direction.


 G-32

Silicone rubber. An elastomeric material made from silicone 
elastomers. Silicone rubber is compatible with fluids that 
attack other natural or synthetic rubbers.

Single-acting actuator. A linear hydraulic or pneumatic 
actuator that uses fluid power for movement in one direction 
and a spring force for its return.

Single-action hand pump. A hand-operated fluid pump 
that moves fluid only during one stroke of the pump handle. 
One stroke pulls the fluid into the pump and the other forces 
the fluid out.

Single-disk brakes. Aircraft brakes in which a single steel 
disk rotates with the wheel between two brake-lining blocks. 
When the brake is applied, the disk is clamped tightly 
between the lining blocks, and the friction slows the aircraft.

Single-servo brakes. Brakes that uses the momentum of the 
aircraft rolling forward to help apply the brakes by wedging 
the brake shoe against the brake drum.

Sintered metal. A porous material made by fusing powdered 
metal under heat and pressure.

Skydrol hydraulic fluid. The registered trade name for a 
synthetic, nonflammable, phosphate ester-base hydraulic 
fluid used in modern high-temperature hydraulic systems.

Slat. A secondary control on an aircraft that allows it to fly 
at a high angle of attack without stalling. A slat is a section 
of leading edge of wing mounted on curved tracks that move 
into and out of the wing on rollers.

Slip roll former. A shop tool used to form large radius curves 
on sheet metal.

Slippage mark. A paint mark extending across the edge of 
an aircraft wheel onto a tube-type tire. When this mark is 
broken, it indicates the tire has slipped on the wheel, and 
there is a good reason to believe the tube has been damaged.

Slipstream area. For the purpose of rib stitch spacing, 
the slipstream area is considered to be the diameter of the 
propeller plus one wing rib on each side. 

Slot (aerodynamic device). A fixed, nozzle-like opening 
near the leading edge of an airplane wing ahead of the aileron. 
A slot acts as a duct to force high-energy air down on the 
upper surface of the wing when the airplane is flying at a 
high angle of attack. The slot, which is located ahead of the 
aileron, causes the inboard portion of the wing to stall first, 
allowing the aileron to remain effective throughout the stall.

Slow-blow fuse. An electrical fuse that allows a large amount 
of current to flow for a short length of time but melts to open the 
circuit if more than its rated current flows for a longer period.

Smoke detector. A device that warns the flight crew of the 
presence of smoke in cargo and/or baggage compartments. 
Some smoke detectors are of the visual type, others are 
photoelectric or ionization devices.

Snubber. A device in a hydraulic or pneumatic component that 
absorbs shock and/or vibration. A snubber is installed in the line 
to a hydraulic pressure gauge to prevent the pointer fluctuating.

Softwood. Wood from a tree that bears cones and has needles 
rather than leaves.

Soldering. A method of thermally joining metal parts with 
a molten nonferrous alloy that melts at a temperature below 
800 °F. The molten alloy is pulled up between close-fitting 
parts by capillary action. When the alloy cools and hardens, 
it forms a strong, leak-proof connection.

Solenoid. An electrical component using a small amount of 
current flowing through a coil to produce a magnetic force 
that pulls an iron core into the center of the coil. The core 
may be attached to a set of heavy-duty electrical contacts, or 
it may be used to move a valve or other mechanical device.

Solidity (helicopter rotor characteristic). The solidity of 
a helicopter rotor system is the ratio of the total blade area 
to the disc area.

Solution heat treatment. A type of heat treatment in 
which the metal is heated in a furnace until it has a uniform 
temperature throughout. It is then removed and quenched in 
cold water. When the metal is hot, the alloying elements enter 
into a solid solution with the base metal to become part of its 
basic structure. When the metal is quenched, these elements 
are locked into place.

Sonic venturi. A sonic venturi in a line between a turbine 
engine or turbocharger and a pressurization system. When 
the air flowing through the sonic venturi reaches the speed 
of sound, a shock wave forms across the throat of the sonic 
venturi and limits the flow. A sonic venturi is also called a 
flow limiter.

Specific heat. The number of BTUs of heat energy needed 
to change the temperature of one pound of a substance 1 °F.

Speed brakes. A secondary control of an airplane that 
produces drag without causing a change in the pitch attitude 
of the airplane. Speed brakes allow an airplane to make a 
steep descent without building up excessive forward airspeed.


G-33

Spike knot. A knot that runs through the depth of a beam 
perpendicular to the annual rings. Spike knots appear most 
frequently in quartersawed wood.

Spin. A flight maneuver in which an airplane descends in 
a corkscrew fashion. One wing is stalled and the other is 
producing lift.

Spirit level. A curved glass tube partially filled with a liquid, 
but with a bubble in it. When the device in which the tube is 
mounted is level, the bubble will be in the center of the tube.

Splayed patch (wood structure repair). A type of patch 
made in an aircraft plywood structure in which the edges 
of the patch are tapered for approximately five times 
the thickness of the plywood. A splayed patch is not 
recommended for use on plywood less than 1⁄10 inch thick.

Split bus. A type of electrical bus that allows all of the 
voltage-sensitive avionic equipment to be isolated from the 
rest of the aircraft electrical system when the engine is being 
started or when the ground-power unit is connected.

Split-rocker switch. An electrical switch whose operating 
rocker is split so one half of the switch can be opened without 
affecting the other half. Split-rocker switches are used as 
aircraft master switches. The battery can be turned on without 
turning on the alternator, but the alternator cannot be turned 
on without also turning on the battery. The alternator can 
be turned off without turning off the battery, but the battery 
cannot be turned off without also turning off the alternator.

Split (wood defect). A longitudinal crack in a piece of wood 
caused by externally induced stress.

Spoilers. Flight controls that are raised up from the upper 
surface of a wing to destroy, or spoil, lift. Flight spoilers are 
used in conjunction with the ailerons to decrease lift and 
increase drag on the descending wing. Ground spoilers are 
used to produce a great amount of drag to slow the airplane 
on its landing roll.

Spongy brakes. Hydraulic brakes whose pedal has a spongy 
feel because of air trapped in the fluid.

Spontaneous combustion. Self-ignition of a material caused 
by heat produced in the material as it combines with oxygen 
from the air.

Springwood. The portion of an annual ring in a piece of 
wood formed principally during the first part of the growing 
season, the spring of the year. Springwood is softer, more 
porous, and lighter than the summerwood.

Square. A four-sided plane figure whose sides are all the 
same length, whose opposite sides are parallel, and whose 
angles are all right angles.

Squat switch. An electrical switch actuated by the landing 
gear scissors on the oleo strut. When no weight is on the 
landing gear, the oleo piston is extended and the switch is 
in one position, but when weight is on the gear, the oleo 
strut compresses and the switch changes its position. Squat 
switches are used in antiskid brake systems, landing gear 
safety circuits, and cabin pressurization systems.

Squib. An explosive device in the discharge valve of a 
high-rate-discharge container of fire-extinguishing agent. 
The squib drives a cutter into the seal in the container to 
discharge the agent.

SRM. Structural Repair Manual.

Stabilator. A flight control on the empennage of an airplane 
that acts as both a stabilizer and an elevator. The entire 
horizontal tail surface pivots and is moved as a unit.

Stability. The characteristic of an aircraft that causes it to 
return to its original flight condition after it has been disturbed.

Stabilons. Small wing-like horizontal surfaces mounted on 
the aft fuselage to improve longitudinal stability of airplanes 
that have an exceptionally wide center of gravity range.

Stagnation point. The point on the leading edge of a wing 
at which the airflow separates, with some flowing over the 
top of the wing and the rest below the wing.

Stall. A flight condition in which an angle of attack is reached 
at which the air ceases to flow smoothly over the upper 
surface of an airfoil. The air becomes turbulent and lift is lost.

Stall strip. A fixed device employed on the leading edge 
of fixed-wing aircraft to initiate flow separation at chosen 
locations on the wing during high-angle of attack flight, 
so as to improve the controllability of the aircraft when it 
enters stall.

Standpipe. A pipe sticking up in a tank or reservoir that 
allows part of the tank to be used as a reserve, or standby, 
source of fluid.

Starter-generator. A single-component starter and generator 
used on many of the smaller gas-turbine engines. It is used 
as a starter, and when the engine is running, its circuitry is 
shifted so that it acts as a generator.


 G-34

Static. Still, not moving. 

Static air pressure. Pressure of the ambient air surrounding 
the aircraft. Static pressure does not take into consideration 
any air movement.

Static dischargers. Devices connected to the trailing edges 
of control surfaces to discharge static electricity harmlessly 
into the air. They discharge the static charges before they can 
build up high enough to cause radio receiver interference.

Static stability. The characteristic of an aircraft that causes it 
to return to straight and level flight after it has been disturbed 
from that condition.

Stoddard solvent. A petroleum product, similar to naphtha, 
used as a solvent and a cleaning fluid.

STOL. Short takeoff and landing.

Stop drilling. A method of stopping the growth of a crack 
in a piece of metal or transparent plastic by drilling a small 
hole at the end of the crack. The stresses are spread out all 
around the circumference of the hole rather than concentrated 
at the end of the crack.

Straight polarity welding. DC-electric arc welding in which 
the electrode is negative with respect to the work.

Strain. A deformation or physical change in a material 
caused by a stress.

Stress. A force set up within an object that tries to prevent 
an outside force from changing its shape.

Stressed skin structure. A type of aircraft structure in which 
all or most of the stresses are carried in the outside skin. A 
stressed skin structure has a minimum of internal structure.

Stress riser. A location where the cross-sectional area of the 
part changes abruptly. Stresses concentrate at such a location 
and failure is likely. A scratch, gouge, or tool mark in the 
surface of a highly stressed part can change the area enough 
to concentrate the stresses and become a stress riser.

Stringer. A part of an aircraft structure used to give the 
fuselage its shape and, in some types of structure, to provide 
a small part of fuselage strength. Formers give the fuselage its 
cross-sectional shape and stringers fill in the shape between 
the formers.

Stroboscopic tachometer. A tachometer used to measure 
the speed of any rotating device without physical contact. 
A highly accurate variable-frequency oscillator triggers a 
high-intensity strobe light.

Sublimation. A process in which a solid material changes 
directly into a vapor without passing through the liquid stage.

Subsonic flight. Flight at an airspeed in which all air flowing 
over the aircraft is moving at a speed below the speed of sound.

Summerwood. The less porous, usually harder portion of 
an annual ring that forms in the latter part of the growing 
season, the summer of the year.

Sump. A low point in an aircraft fuel tank in which water 
and other contaminants can collect and be held until they 
can be drained out.

Supercooled water. Water in its liquid form at a temperature 
well below its natural freezing temperature. When 
supercooled water is disturbed, it immediately freezes.

Superheat. Heat energy that is added to a refrigerant after 
it changes from a liquid to a vapor.

Super heterodyne circuit. A sensitive radio receiver circuit 
in which a local oscillator produces a frequency that is a 
specific difference from the received signal frequency. The 
desired signal and the output from the oscillator are mixed, 
and they produce a single, constant intermediate frequency. 
This IF is amplified, demodulated, and detected to produce 
the audio frequency that is used to drive the speaker.

Supersonic flight. Flight at an airspeed in which all air 
flowing over the aircraft is moving at a speed greater than 
the speed of sound.

Supplemental Type Certificate (STC). An approval issued 
by the FAA for a modification to a type certificated airframe, 
engine, or component. More than one STC can be issued for 
the same basic alteration, but each holder must prove to the 
FAA that the alteration meets all the requirements of the 
original type certificate.

Surface tape. Strips of aircraft fabric that are doped over all 
seams and places where the fabric is stitched to the aircraft 
structure. Surface tape is also doped over the wing leading 
edges where abrasive wear occurs. The edges of surface tape 
are pink, or notched, to keep them from raveling before the 
dope is applied.


G-35

Surfactant. A surface active agent, or partially soluble 
contaminant, which is a by-product of fuel processing or of 
fuel additives. Surfactants adhere to other contaminants and 
cause them to drop out of the fuel and settle to the bottom 
of the fuel tank as sludge.

Surveyor’s transit. An instrument consisting of a telescope 
mounted on a flat, graduated, circular plate on a tripod. 
The plate can be adjusted so it is level, and its graduations 
oriented to magnetic north. When an object is viewed through 
the telescope, its azimuth and elevation may be determined.

Swashplate. The component in a helicopter control system 
that consists basically of two bearing races with ball bearings 
between them. The lower, or nonrotating, race is tilted by the 
cyclic control, and the upper, or rotating, race has arms which 
connect to the control horns on the rotor blades. Movement 
of the cyclic pitch control is transmitted to the rotor blades 
through the swashplate. Movement of the collective pitch 
control raises or lowers the entire swashplate assembly to 
change the pitch of all the blades at the same time.

Synchro system. A remote instrument indicating system. 
A synchro transmitter is actuated by the device whose 
movement is to be measured, and it is connected electrically 
with wires to a synchro indicator whose pointer follows the 
movement of the shaft of the transmitter.

Symmetrical airfoil. An airfoil that has the same shape on 
both sides of its chord line, or center line.

Symmetry check. A check of an airframe to determine that 
the wings and tail are symmetrical about the longitudinal axis.

System-pressure regulator (hydraulic system component). 
A type of hydraulic system-pressure control valve. When the 
system pressure is low, as it is when some unit is actuated, 
the output of the constant-delivery pump is directed into the 
system. When the actuation is completed and the pressure 
builds up to a specified kick-out pressure, the pressure 
regulator shifts. A check valve seals the system off and the 
pressure is maintained by the accumulator. The pump is 
unloaded and its output is directed back into the reservoir 
with very little opposition. The pump output pressure drops, 
but the volume of flow remains the same. When the system 
pressure drops to the specified kick-in pressure, the regulator 
again shifts and directs fluid into the system. Spool-type 
and balanced-pressure-type system pressure regulators 
are completely automatic in their operation and require no 
attention on the part of the flight crew.

TACAN (Tactical Air Navigation). A radio navigation 
facility used by military aircraft for both direction and 
distance information. Civilian aircraft receive distance 
information from a TACAN on their DME.

Tack coat. A coat of finishing material sprayed on the surface 
and allowed to dry until the solvents evaporate. As soon as 
the solvents evaporate, a wet full-bodied coat of material is 
sprayed over it.

Tack rag. A clean, lintless rag, slightly damp with thinner. 
A tack rag is used to wipe a surface to prepare it to receive 
a coat of finishing material.

Tack weld. A method of holding parts together before they 
are permanently welded. The parts are assembled, and small 
spots of weld are placed at strategic locations to hold them 
in position.

Tacky. Slightly sticky to the touch.

Tailets. Small vertical surfaces mounted underside of 
the horizontal stabilizer of some airplanes to increase the 
directional stability.

Takeoff warning system. An aural warning system that 
provides audio warning signals when the thrust levers are 
advanced for takeoff if the stabilizer, flaps, or speed brakes 
are in an unsafe condition for takeoff.

Tang. A tapered shank sticking out from the blade of a knife 
or a file. The handle of a knife or file is mounted on the tang.

TCAS. Traffic Alert Collision Avoidance System.

Teflon. The registered trade name for a fluorocarbon resin used 
to make hydraulic and pneumatic seals, hoses, and backup rings.

Tempered glass. Glass that has been heat-treated to increase 
its strength. Tempered glass is used in bird-proof, heated 
windshields for high-speed aircraft.

Terminal strips. A group of threaded studs mounted in a 
strip of insulating plastic. Electrical wires with crimped-on 
terminals are placed over the studs and secured with nuts.

Terminal VOR. A low-powered VOR that is normally 
located on an airport.

Tetraethyl lead (TEL). A heavy, oily, poisonous liquid, 
Pb(C2H5)

4 , that is mixed into aviation gasoline to increase 
its critical pressure and temperature.


 G-36

Therapeutic mask adapter. A calibrated orifice in the mask 
adapter for a continuous-flow oxygen system that increases 
the flow of oxygen to a mask being used by a passenger who 
is known to have a heart or respiratory problem.

Thermal dimpling. See hot dimpling.

Thermal relief valve. A relief valve in a hydraulic system 
that relieves pressure that builds up in an isolated part of the 
system because of heat. Thermal relief valves are set at a 
higher pressure than the system pressure relief valve.

Thermistor. A special form of electrical resistor whose 
resistance varies with its temperature.

Thermistor material. A material with a negative temperature 
coefficient that causes its resistance to decrease as its 
temperature increases.

Thermocouple. A loop consisting of two kinds of wire, joined 
at the hot, or measuring, junction and at the cold junction in the 
instrument. The voltage difference between the two junctions 
is proportional to the temperature difference between the 
junctions. In order for the current to be meaningful, the 
resistance of the thermocouple is critical, and the leads are 
designed for a specific installation. Their length should not 
be altered. Thermocouples used to measure cylinder head 
temperature are usually made of iron and constantan, and 
thermocouples that measure exhaust gas temperature for 
turbine engines are made of chromel and alumel.

Thermocouple fire-detection system. A fire-detection 
system that works on the principle of the rate-of-temperature 
rise. Thermocouples are installed around the area to be 
protected, and one thermocouple is surrounded by thermal 
insulation that prevents its temperature changing rapidly. In 
the event of a fire, the temperature of all the thermocouples 
except the protected one will rise immediately and a fire 
warning will be initiated. In the case of a general overheat 
condition, the temperature of all the thermocouples will rise 
uniformly and there will be no fire warning.

Thermoplastic resin. A type of plastic material that becomes 
soft when heated and hardens when cooled.

Thermosetting resin. A type of plastic material that, when once 
hardened by heat, cannot be softened by being heated again.

Thermostatic expansion valve (TEV). The component 
in a vapor-cycle cooling system that meters the refrigerant 
into the evaporator. The amount of refrigerant metered by 
the TEV is determined by the temperature and pressure of 
the refrigerant as it leaves the evaporator coils. The TEV 
changes the refrigerant from a high-pressure liquid into a 
low-pressure liquid.

Thixotropic agents. Materials, such as microballoons, added 
to a resin to give it body and increase its workability.

TIG welding. Tungsten inert welding is a form of electric arc 
welding in which the electrode is a nonconsumable tungsten 
wire. TIG welding is now called GTA (gas tungsten arc) welding.

Toe-in. A condition of landing gear alignment in which the 
front of the tires are closer together than the rear. When the 
aircraft rolls forward, the wheels try to move closer together.

Toe-out. A condition of landing gear alignment in which 
the front of the tires are further apart than the rear. When the 
aircraft rolls forward, the wheels try to move farther apart.

Torque. A force that produces or tries to produce rotation.

Torque links. The hinged link between the piston and cylinder 
of an oleo-type landing gear shock absorber. The torque links 
allow the piston to move freely in and out of the landing 
gear cylinder, but prevent it rotating. The torque links can be 
adjusted to achieve and maintain the correct wheel alignment. 
Torque links are also called scissors and nutcrackers.

Torque tube. A tube in an aircraft control system that 
transmits a torsional force from the operating control to the 
control surface.

Torsion rod. A device in a spring tab to which the control 
horn is attached. For normal operation, the torsion rod acts as 
a fixed attachment point, but when the control surface loads 
are high, the torsion rod twists and allows the control horn 
to deflect the spring tab.

Total air pressure. The pressure a column of moving air 
will have if it is stopped.

TMC. Thrust management computer.

Toroidal coil. An electrical coil wound around a ring-shaped 
core of highly permeable material.

Total air temperature. The temperature a column of moving 
air will have if it is stopped.


G-37

TR unit. A transformer-rectifier unit. A TR unit reduces the 
voltage of AC and changes it into DC.

Tractor powerplant. An airplane powerplant in which the 
propeller is mounted in the front, and its thrust pulls the 
airplane rather than pushes it.

Trammel (verb). To square up the Pratt truss used in an 
airplane wing. Trammel points are set on the trammel bar 
so they measure the distance between the center of the front 
spar, at the inboard compression strut, and at the center of 
the rear spar at the next compression strut outboard. The drag 
and antidrug wires are adjusted until the distance between the 
center of the rear spar at the inboard compression strut and the 
center of the front spar at the next outboard compression strut 
is exactly the same as that between the first points measured.

Trammel bar. A wood or metal bar on which trammel points 
are mounted to compare distances.

Trammel points. A set of sharp-pointed pins that protrude 
from the sides of a trammel bar.

Transducer. A device that changes energy from one form 
to another. Commonly used transducers change mechanical 
movement or pressures into electrical signals.

Transformer rectifier. A component in a large aircraft 
electrical system used to reduce the AC voltage and change 
it into DC for charging the battery and for operating DC 
equipment in the aircraft.

Translational lift. The additional lift produced by a 
helicopter rotor as the helicopter changes from hovering to 
forward flight.

Transonic flight. Flight at an airspeed in which some air 
flowing over the aircraft is moving at a speed below the 
speed of sound, and other air is moving at a speed greater 
than the speed of sound.

Transverse pitch. See gauge.

Triangle. A three-sided, closed plane figure. The sum of the 
three angles in a triangle is always equal to 180°.

Tricresyl phosphate (TCP). A chemical compound, 
(CH3C6H4O)

3PO, used in aviation gasoline to assist in 
scavenging the lead deposits left from the tetraethyl lead.

Trim tab. A small control tab mounted on the trailing edge 
of a movable control surface. The tab may be adjusted to 
provide an aerodynamic force to hold the surface on which it 
is mounted deflected in order to trim the airplane for hands-
off flight at a specified airspeed.

Trimmed flight. A flight condition in which the aerodynamic 
forces acting on the control surfaces are balanced and the 
aircraft is able to fly straight and level with no control input.

Trip-free circuit breaker. A circuit breaker that opens a circuit 
any time an excessive amount of current flows, regardless of 
the position of the circuit breaker’s operating handle.

Troubleshooting. A procedure used in aircraft maintenance 
in which the operation of a malfunctioning system is analyzed 
to find the reason for the malfunction and to find a method 
for returning the system to its condition of normal operation.

True airspeed (TAS). Airspeed shown on the airspeed 
indicator (indicated airspeed) corrected for position error 
and nonstandard air temperature and pressure.

Trunnion. Projections from the cylinder of a retractable 
landing gear strut about which the strut pivots retract.

Truss-type structure. A type of structure made up of 
longitudinal beams and cross braces. Compression loads 
between the main beams are carried by rigid cross braces. 
Tension loads are carried by stays, or wires, that go from one 
main beam to the other and cross between the cross braces.

Turbine. A rotary device actuated by impulse or reaction 
of a fluid flowing through vanes or blades that are arranges 
around a central shaft.

Turn and slip indicator. A rate gyroscopic flight instrument 
that gives the pilot an indication of the rate of rotation of the 
aircraft about its vertical axis. A ball in a curved glass tube 
shows the pilot the relationship between the centrifugal force 
and the force of gravity. This indicates whether or not the 
angle of bank is proper for the rate of turn. The turn and slip 
indicator shows the trim condition of the aircraft and serves 
as an emergency source of bank information in case the 
attitude gyro fails. Turn and slip indicators were formerly 
called needle and ball and turn and bank indicators.

Turnbuckle. A component in an aircraft control system 
used to adjust cable tension. A turnbuckle consists of a brass 
tubular barrel with right-hand threads in one end and left-hand 
in the other end. Control cable terminals screw into the two 
ends of the barrel, and turning the barrel pulls the terminals 
together, shortening the cable.


 G-38

Twist drill. A metal cutting tool turned in a drill press or 
handheld drill motor. A twist drill has a straight shank and 
spiraled flutes. The cutting edge is ground on the end of the 
spiraled flutes.

Twist rope. A stripe of paint on flexible hose that runs the 
length of the hose. If this stripe spirals around the hose after 
it is installed, it indicates the hose was twisted when it was 
installed. Twist stripes are also called lay lines.

Two-terminal spot-type fire detection system. A fire 
detection system that uses individual thermoswitches 
installed around the inside of the area to be protected. These 
thermoswitches are wired in parallel between two separate 
circuits. A short or an open circuit can exist in either circuit 
without causing a fire warning.

Type Certificate Data Sheets (TCDS). The official 
specifications of an aircraft, engine, or propeller issued by the 
Federal Aviation Administration. The TCDS lists pertinent 
specifications for the device, and it is the responsibility of 
the mechanic and/or inspector to ensure, on each inspection, 
that the device meets these specifications.

UHF. Ultrahigh frequency.

Ultimate tensile strength. The tensile strength required to 
cause a material to break or to continue to deform under a 
decreasing load.

Ultraviolet-blocking dope. Dope that contains aluminum 
powder or some other pigment that blocks the passage of 
ultraviolet rays of the sun. The coat of dope protects the organic 
fabrics and clear dope from deterioration by these rays.

Undamped oscillation. Oscillation that continues with an 
unchanging amplitude once it has started.

Underslung rotor. A helicopter rotor whose center of gravity 
is below the point at which it is attached to the mast.

Unidirectional fabric. Fabric in which all the threads run 
in the same direction. These threads are often bound with a 
few fibers run at right angles, just enough to hold the yarns 
together and prevent their bunching.

Unloading valve. This is another name for system pressure 
regulator. See system pressure regulator.

Utility finish. The finish of an aircraft that gives the necessary 
tautness and fill to the fabric and the necessary protection 
to the metal, but does not have the glossy appearance of a 
show-type finish.

Vapor lock. A condition in which vapors form in the fuel 
lines and block the flow of fuel to the carburetor.

Vapor pressure. The pressure of the vapor above a liquid 
needed to prevent the liquid evaporating. Vapor pressure is 
always specified at a specific temperature.

Variable displacement pump. A fluid pump whose output 
is controlled by the demands of the system. These pumps 
normally have a built-in system pressure regulator. When the 
demands of the system are low, the pump moves very little 
fluid, but when the demands are high, the pump moves a lot 
of fluid. Most variable displacement pumps used in aircraft 
hydraulic systems are piston-type pumps.

Varnish (aircraft finishing material). A material used to 
produce an attractive and protective coating on wood or 
metal. Varnish is made of a resin dissolved in a solvent and 
thinned until it has the proper viscosity to spray or brush. The 
varnish is spread evenly over the surface to be coated, and 
when the solvents evaporate, a tough film is left.

Varsol. A petroleum product similar to naphtha used as a 
solvent and cleaning fluid.

Veneer. Thin sheets of wood “peeled” from a log. A wide-
blade knife held against the surface of the log peels away the 
veneer as the log is rotated in the cutter. Veneer is used for 
making plywood. Several sheets of veneer are glued together, 
with the grain of each sheet placed at 45° or 90° to the grain 
of the sheets next to it.

Vertical axis. An imaginary line, passing vertically through 
the center of gravity of an airplane.

Vertical fin. The fixed vertical surface in the empennage of 
an airplane. The vertical fin acts as a weathervane to give 
the airplane directional stability.

VFR. Visual flight rules.

VHF. Very high frequency.

Vibrator-type voltage regulator. A type of voltage regulator 
used with a generator or alternator that intermittently places 
a resistance in the field circuit to control the voltage. A set 
of vibrating contacts puts the resistor in the circuit and takes 
it out several times a second.

Viscosity. The resistance of a fluid to flow. Viscosity refers 
to the “stiffness” of the fluid, or its internal friction.


G-39

Viscosity cup. A specially shaped cup with an accurately 
sized hole in its bottom. The cup is submerged in the liquid 
to completely fill it. It is then lifted from the liquid and the 
time in seconds is measured from the beginning of the flow 
through the hole until the first break in this flow. The viscosity 
of the liquid relates to this time.

Vixen file. A metal-cutting hand file that has curved teeth 
across its faces. Vixen files are used to remove large amounts 
of soft metal.

VNE. Never-exceed speed. The maximum speed the aircraft 
is allowed to attain in any conditions of flight.

Volatile liquid. A liquid that easily changes into a vapor.

Voltmeter multiplier. A precision resistor in series with a 
voltmeter mechanism used to extend the range of the basic 
meter or to allow a single meter to measure several ranges 
of voltage.

VOR. Very high frequency Omni Range navigation.

VORTAC. An electronic navigation system that contains 
both a VOR and a TACAN facility.

Vortex (plural vortices). A whirling motion in a fluid.

Vortex generator. Small, low-aspect-ratio airfoils installed 
in pairs on the upper surface of a wing, on both sides of the 
vertical fin just ahead of the rudder, and on the underside 
of the vertical stabilizers of some airplanes. Their function 
is to pull high-energy air down to the surface to energize 
the boundary layer and prevent airflow separation until the 
surface reaches a higher angle of attack.

Warp clock. An alignment indicator included in a structural 
repair manual to show the orientation of the piles of a 
composite material. The ply direction is shown in relation 
to a reference direction.

Warp threads. Threads that run the length of the roll of 
fabric, parallel to the selvage edge. Warp threads are often 
stronger than fill threads.

Warp tracers. Threads of a different color from the warp 
threads that are woven into a material to identify the direction 
of the warp threads.

Wash in. A twist in an airplane wing that increases its angle 
of incidence near the tip.

Wash out. A twist in an airplane wing that decreases its angle 
of incidence near the tip.

Watt. The basic unit of electrical power. One watt is equal 
to 1⁄746 horsepower.

Way point. A phantom location created in certain electronic 
navigation systems by measuring direction and distance from 
a VORTAC station or by latitude and longitude coordinates 
from Loran or GPS.

Web of a spar. The part of a spar between the caps.

Weft threads. See fill threads.

Wet-type vacuum pump. An engine-driven air pump that 
uses steel vanes. These pumps are lubricated by engine oil 
drawn in through holes in the pump base. The oil passes 
through the pump and is exhausted with the air. Wet-type 
pumps must have oil separators in their discharge line to trap 
the oil and return it to the engine crankcase.

Wing fences. Vertical vanes that extend chordwise across the 
upper surface of an airplane wing to prevent spanwise airflow.

Wing heavy. An out-of-trim flight condition in which an 
airplane flies hands off, with one wing low.

Wire bundle. A compact group of electrical wires held together 
with special wrapping devices or with waxed string. These 
bundles are secured to the aircraft structure with special clamps.

Woof threads. See fill threads.

Work. The product of force times distance.

Yaw. Rotation of an aircraft about its vertical axis.

Yaw damper. An automatic flight control system that 
counteracts the rolling and yawing produced by Dutch roll. 
See Dutch roll. A yaw damper senses yaw with a rate gyro 
and moves the rudder an amount proportional to the rate of 
yaw, but in the opposite direction.

Yield strength. The amount of stress needed to permanently 
deform a material.

Zener diode. A special type of solid-state diode designed to 
have a specific breakdown voltage and to operate with current 
flowing through it in its reverse direction.


 G-40

Zeppelin. The name of large, rigid, lighter-than-air ships 
built by the Zeppelin Company in Germany prior to and 
during World War I.

Zero-center ammeter. An ammeter in a light aircraft 
electrical system located between the battery and the main 
bus. This ammeter shows the current flowing into or out of 
the battery.


I-1

Index

Symbols
100-hour inspection .....................................................2-60

A
AC alternators ..............................................................9-41
AC alternators control systems ....................................9-45
Acceleration ...................................................................2-3
Acetone ..........................................................................8-2
Acetylene .......................................................................5-7
Acrylic urethanes ...........................................................8-5
Adhesive pot life ..........................................................6-11
Adhesives .......................................................................7-9
Adjusting the spray pattern ..........................................8-11
Adjustment of bend radius ...........................................4-69
Aerodynamics ......................................................... 2-2,2-3
Aileron installation .......................................................2-40
Ailerons ........................................................................1-26
Aileron station ..............................................................1-39
Air compressors .............................................................8-6
Aircraft ...........................................................................1-5
Aircraft batteries ..........................................................9-21

Battery and charger characteristics...........................9-25
Lead-acid batteries ................................................9-25
NiCd batteries .......................................................9-25

Capacity ....................................................................9-22
Charging ...................................................................9-24

Constant current charging .....................................9-24
Constant voltage charging (CP) ............................9-24

Freezing ....................................................................9-23
Inspection .................................................................9-26
Installation practices .................................................9-26

Battery hold down devices ....................................9-26
Battery sump jars ..................................................9-26
Battery venting ......................................................9-26
External surface ....................................................9-26
Installing ...............................................................9-26
Quick-disconnect type battery ..............................9-27
Replacing lead-acid batteries ................................9-26

Lead-acid batteries ...................................................9-21
Maintenance .............................................................9-24

Ratings by specification ...........................................9-23
Storing and servicing facilities .................................9-23
Temperature correction ............................................9-23
Ventilation systems ..................................................9-26

Aircraft electrical systems ............................................9-47
Large multiengine aircraft ........................................9-60

Ac power systems .................................................9-60
Parallel systems .................................................9-63
Split-bus power distribution systems .................9-61
Split-parallel systems .........................................9-64

Light multiengine aircraft .........................................9-57
Power distribution on multiengine aircraft ...........9-58

Small single-engine aircraft......................................9-47
AC supply .............................................................9-55
Alternator circuit ...................................................9-48
Avionics power circuit ..........................................9-51
Battery circuit .......................................................9-47
External power circuit ...........................................9-50
Generator circuit ...................................................9-48
Landing gear circuit ..............................................9-52
Starter circuit ........................................................9-50

Aircraft inspection .......................................................2-59
Aircraft lighting systems ............................................9-101

Exterior lights
Anticollision lights ..............................................9-102
Landing and taxi lights .......................................9-103
Position lights .....................................................9-101
Wing inspection lights ........................................9-104

Interior lights ..........................................................9-104
Maintenance and inspection of lighting 
systems ...................................................................9-105

Aircraft metal structural repair .......................................4-1
Aircraft rigging ............................................................2-39
Aircraft structures ..........................................................1-1
Aircraft wood and structural repair ................................6-1
Airfoil .............................................................................2-4
Airframe .......................................................................1-40
Airplane assembly ........................................................2-40

and rigging ................................................................2-37
Air tools .......................................................................7-19
Air traffic control (ATC) transponder inspections .......2-62


 I-2

Alcohol ...........................................................................8-2
Alternate pressure application ......................................7-32
Alternating current (AC) introduction ...........................9-9

Definitions ..................................................................9-9
Cycle .....................................................................9-10
Effective ..................................................................9-9
Frequency .............................................................9-10
Instantaneous ..........................................................9-9
Peak .........................................................................9-9
Period ....................................................................9-11
Phase relationships ................................................9-11
Values of AC ..........................................................9-9
Wavelength ...........................................................9-11

Alternator drive ............................................................9-42
Alternator voltage regulators .......................................9-40
Altimeter and static system inspections .......................2-62
Aluminum alloys ..........................................................4-30
Aluminum soldering ....................................................5-21
Aluminum welding ......................................................5-18
Amorphous thermoplastics ............................................7-8
Amphibious aircraft .....................................................1-36
Angle adapters .............................................................4-16
Angle of attack ...............................................................2-6
Angle of incidence .........................................................2-5
Annual and 100-hour inspections ...................... 2-60, 2-63
Anti-chafe tape ...............................................................3-5
Antiservo tabs ..............................................................1-34
Antitorque pedals .........................................................2-30
Antitorque system ........................................................1-45
Application of cement ..................................................7-56
Applying the finish ......................................................8-11
Applying the glue/adhesive ..........................................6-11
Approval of repair ........................................................4-94
Aramid (kevlar®) fiber-reinforced plastics .................7-52
Arc welding procedures ...............................................5-25
Argon .............................................................................5-7
Assessment of damage .................................................4-92
Atmosphere ....................................................................2-2
Atmospheric pressure .....................................................2-2
Audible sonic testing (coin tapping) ............................7-16
Autoclave .....................................................................7-23
Autogyro ......................................................................2-17
Automated tap test .......................................................7-16
Automatic center punch .................................................4-6
Autorotation .................................................................2-27
Auxiliary control surfaces ............................................1-28
Auxiliary lift devices ....................................................2-12
Axes of an aircraft ..........................................................2-9

B
Balance panels .............................................................1-33
Balsa wood ...................................................................7-13
Band saw ......................................................................4-11
Bar folding machine .....................................................4-21
Base measurement .......................................................4-59
Bead weld .....................................................................5-28
Bearing ...........................................................................4-3
Bell stabilizer bar system .............................................2-30
Belt drive clutch ...........................................................2-36
Bend allowance (BA) ...................................................4-59
Bending .........................................................................,1-7
Bending a U-channel ....................................................4-61
Bend radius ..................................................................4-59
Bend tangent line (BL) .................................................4-59
Benzene ..........................................................................8-2
Bernoulli’s Principle ......................................................2-4
Bias ................................................................................3-3
Bidirectional (fabric) ......................................................7-3
Biplane assembly and rigging ......................................2-55
Bismaleimides (BMI) .....................................................7-8
Blanket method ............................................................3-12
Bleeder ply ...................................................................7-21
Bleedout technique .......................................................7-29
Bleriot, Louis .................................................................1-3
Blind bolts .......................................................... 4-53, 7-48
Blind fasteners .............................................................7-47

Nnonstructural ..........................................................4-56
Blind rivets ...................................................................4-47
Blushing .......................................................................8-13
Bolt and bushing holes .................................................6-19
Bolted repairs ...............................................................7-44
Bonded flush patch repairs ...........................................7-37
Boron..............................................................................7-6
Boundary layer ...............................................................2-7
Box and pan brake (finger brake) ................................4-22
Box beam ........................................................... 1-12, 1-13
Brazing and soldering ..................................................5-19
Breather material ..........................................................7-21
Brinelling .....................................................................4-90
Brushing .........................................................................8-5
Bucking bar ..................................................................4-36
Bumping .......................................................................4-58
Burnishing ....................................................................4-90
Burr ..............................................................................4-90
Burring tool ..................................................................4-14
Butt joints .....................................................................5-30
Buttock line ..................................................................1-39


I-3

C
Cable connectors ..........................................................2-45
Cable construction .......................................................2-40
Cable designations .......................................................2-40
Cable drums .................................................................2-47
Cable guides .................................................................2-43
Cable inspection ...........................................................2-42
Cable system installation .............................................2-43
Cable systems ...............................................................2-40
Cable tension ...................................................... 2-45, 2-51
Cantilever design .........................................................1-11
Carbon fiber reinforced plastics ...................................7-52
Carbon/graphite ..............................................................7-5
Carburizing flame ........................................................5-13
Caul ..............................................................................6-11
Cayley, George ..............................................................1-1
C-clamps ............................................................ 4-29, 7-32
Cementing ....................................................................7-56
Center punch ..................................................................4-6
Centrifugal clutch .........................................................2-36
Ceramic fibers ................................................................7-6
Chanute, octave ..............................................................1-2
Characteristics of a good weld .....................................5-16
Chassis punch.................................................................4-7
Chattering .....................................................................4-91
Checking dihedral ........................................................2-48
Checking engine alignment ..........................................2-50
Checking fin verticality ................................................2-50
Checking incidence ......................................................2-48
Check valves and flashback arrestors ............................5-8
Chemical stripping .......................................................8-21
CherryBUCK® 95 KSI One-Piece Shear Pin ..............4-51
CherryMAX® bulbed blind rivet .................................4-48
Cherry MAXibolt® Blind Bolt System .......................4-54
Cherry’s E-Z Buck® (CSR90433) Hollow Rivet ........7-47
Chip chasers .................................................................4-21
Chrome molybdenum ...................................................5-17
Circular-cutting saws .....................................................4-8
Clamps and vises ..........................................................4-29
Classification of damage ..............................................4-91
Cleaning .......................................................................7-57
Close contact adhesive .................................................6-10
Closed angle .................................................................4-60
Closed assembly time ..................................................6-11
Closed end bend (more than 90°).................................4-74
Clutch ...........................................................................2-35
Coaxial cable ................................................................9-96
Cobalt alloy drill bits ...................................................4-17
Co-bonding ..................................................................7-28
Co-curing .....................................................................7-28
Collective pitch ............................................................2-28

Combinations of damages ............................................7-14
Combination square .......................................................4-4
Common paint troubles ................................................8-13
Common spray gun problems ......................................8-12
Composite honeycomb sandwich repairs .....................7-33
Composite repairs ........................................................7-19
Compound curve forming ............................................7-55
Compression ..................................................................1-7
Compression riveting ...................................................4-39
Concave surfaces .........................................................4-79
Conduit .........................................................................9-83

Flexible conduit ........................................................9-85
Rigid conduit ............................................................9-84

Connecting torch ..........................................................5-11
Connectors

Adjacent locations ....................................................9-95
Drainage ...................................................................9-96
Spare contacts for future wiring ...............................9-95
Voltage and current rating ........................................9-95
Wire installation into the connector .........................9-95
Wire support .............................................................9-96

Continuous Airworthiness Maintenance 
Program (CAMP) .........................................................2-67
Control ...........................................................................2-9
Control operating systems ............................................2-40
Controls ........................................................................1-46
Control surface travel ...................................................2-53
Convex surfaces ...........................................................4-79
Coriolis effect ...............................................................2-22
Corner joints .................................................................5-31
Cornice brake ...............................................................4-22
Correct forming of a weld ............................................5-16
Corrosion............................................................ 4-90, 7-15
Corrosion precautions ..................................................7-46
Corrosion treatment .....................................................4-94
Corrugated skin repair ..................................................4-99
Cotton covered aircraft ................................................3-24
Count ..............................................................................3-3
Countersinking ................................................... 4-41, 7-52
Countersinking tools .......................................... 4-37, 4-41
Countersunk rivets .......................................................4-41
Covering processes ........................................................3-8
Cowling ........................................................................1-20
Crack ............................................................................4-90
Crimping ......................................................................4-58
Cross coat .......................................................................3-3
Curing of composite materials .....................................7-32
Curing stages of resins ...................................................7-8
Current ...........................................................................9-2

Conventional Current Theory and Electron Theory ...9-3
Current limiting devices .............................................9-100


 I-4

Circuit breakers ......................................................9-100
Fuses .......................................................................9-100

Curved flanged parts ....................................................4-77
Cut ................................................................................4-90
Cutting equipment ........................................................7-52
Cutting processes and precautions ...............................7-52
Cutting tools ...................................................................4-8
Cutting torch ..................................................................5-9
Cyclic pitch ..................................................................2-29

D
Damage necessitating replacement of parts .................4-92
Damage removal ..........................................................4-93
Damage repairable by insertion ...................................4-92
Damage repairable by patching ...................................4-91
Damage requiring core replacement and repair 
to one or both faceplates ..............................................7-34
DC generators ..............................................................9-32

Compound wound ....................................................9-32
Construction features

Armature ...............................................................9-30
Field frame ............................................................9-29

Controls ....................................................................9-27
Maintenance .............................................................9-33
Parallel (shunt) wound..............................................9-32
Ratings ......................................................................9-33
Series wound ............................................................9-32

Decals ...........................................................................8-18
De Havilland Mosquito ..................................................1-4
Delamination and debonds ...........................................7-14
Density ...........................................................................2-3
Dent ..............................................................................4-91
Dents at a cluster weld .................................................5-32
Dents between clusters .................................................5-32
Description ...................................................................4-31
Design of a patch for a nonpressurized area ................4-98
Die grinder ...................................................................4-14
Different flames ...........................................................5-13
Dimpling ......................................................................4-42
Dimpling dies ...............................................................4-37
Dimpling inspection .....................................................4-44
Dipping ..........................................................................8-5
Directional stability ......................................................2-10
Disk sander ...................................................................4-11
Display of marks ..........................................................8-17
Display of nationality and registration marks ..............8-17
Dividers ..........................................................................4-4
Dollies and stakes ........................................................4-27
Dope ...............................................................................8-4
Double spread ..............................................................6-10
Double Vacuum Debulk Principle ...............................7-42

Downdraft tables ..........................................................7-53
Drag ........................................................................ 2-7, 2-8
Drill bit sizes ................................................................4-18
Drill bushing holder types ............................................4-19
Drill extensions and adapters .......................................4-16
Drilling ...................................................... 4-40, 7-49, 7-55
Drilling large holes ......................................................4-20
Drill lubrication ............................................................4-18
Drill press .....................................................................4-15
Drill stops .....................................................................4-19
Drive nut-type of blind bolt .........................................4-54
Drive punch ....................................................................4-6
Driving the rivet ...........................................................4-40
Drop hammer ...............................................................4-24
Dry fiber material ...........................................................7-8
Dual purpose flight control surfaces ............................1-27
Dual rotor helicopter ....................................................2-18
Dutch roll .....................................................................2-11
Dynamic balance ..........................................................2-38
Dynamic stability ...........................................................2-9

E
Eddie-Bolt® 2 Pin Fastening System ..........................4-53
Eddie-Bolt® Fasteners .................................................7-46
Edge distance ...............................................................4-34
Edge joints ...................................................................5-31
Edges of the panel ........................................................4-99
Effective translational lift (ETL) .................................2-24
Electric arc welding .......................................................5-2
Electromagnetic generation of power ............................9-5
Electromotive force (voltage) ........................................9-4
Electronic blade tracker ...............................................2-32
Electronic method ........................................................2-33
Elevated temperature curing ........................................7-32
Elevator ........................................................................1-27
Empennage ...................................................................1-22
Empennage installation ................................................2-40
Engine mount repairs ...................................................5-36
Engine mounts .............................................................1-20
Envelope bagging .........................................................7-31
Envelope method .........................................................3-12
Epoxy ............................................................................,7-7
Equal pressure torch .......................................................5-8
Equipment ....................................................................7-49
Equipment setup ...........................................................5-10
Erosion .........................................................................4-91
Evaluating the rivet ......................................................4-44
Expansion and contraction of metals ...........................5-29
Extension drill bits .......................................................4-16
External and internal inspection .....................................6-3
External bonded patch repairs ......................................7-41


I-5

External bonded repair with prepreg plies ...................7-41
External repair using precured laminate patches .........7-42
External repair using wet layup and double 
Vacuum Debulk Method (DVD) .................................7-42
Eye protection ..............................................................7-53

F
Fabric cement ....................................................... 3-7, 3-16
Fabric heat shrinking ....................................................3-17
Fabric impregnation using a vacuum bag ....................7-30
Fabric impregnation with a brush or squeegee ............7-30
Fabric patch ..................................................................6-20
Fabric sealer ...................................................................3-7
Fabric strength ...............................................................3-9
Fabric testing devices ...................................................3-11
Fastener materials ........................................................7-46
Fasteners used with composite laminates ....................7-46
Fastener system for sandwich honeycomb 
structures (SPS Technologies Comp Tite) ...................7-46
Fenestron® ...................................................................1-46
Fiber breakage ..............................................................7-13
Fiber forms .....................................................................7-3
Fiberglass .......................................................................7-4
Fiberglass coverings .....................................................3-24
Fiberglass molded mat repairs .....................................7-40
Fiberlite ........................................................................7-48
Fiber orientation .............................................................7-2
Files ..............................................................................4-13
Filler rod .......................................................................5-10
Fillers .............................................................................3-7
Fillet weld ....................................................................5-29
Film adhesives ...............................................................7-9
Finishing tapes .............................................................3-21
Fire protection ..............................................................7-53
Fisheyes........................................................................8-15
Fixed-wing aircraft .........................................................1-5
Flag and pole ................................................................2-31
Flange ...........................................................................4-59
Flanged angles .............................................................4-76
Flap installation ............................................................2-40
Flapping .......................................................................1-44
Flaps .............................................................................1-28

Fowler .......................................................................1-30
Split ..........................................................................1-30

Flap station ...................................................................1-39
Flat ...............................................................................4-60
Flat position welding....................................................5-28
Flawed fastener holes ...................................................7-14
Flight control surfaces ..................................................1-24
Floats ............................................................................4-99
Flush patch ...................................................................4-97

Flutter and vibration precautions .................................4-89
Fly-by-wire control ......................................................2-14
Foaming adhesives .......................................................7-10
Folding a box ...............................................................4-72
Folding sheet metal ......................................................4-58
Form block or die .........................................................4-80
Formed or extruded angles ...........................................4-75
Former or bulkhead repair .........................................4-103
Forming

By bumping ..............................................................4-79
Methods ....................................................................7-55
Procedures and techniques .......................................7-54
Process ......................................................................4-57
Tools .........................................................................4-21
With an English Wheel.............................................4-26

Forms ...........................................................................7-55
Formula 1: bend allowance for a 90° bend ..................4-64
Formula 2: bend allowance for a 90° bend ..................4-64
Forward flight ..............................................................2-23
Freewheeling unit .........................................................2-36
Fresh air breathing systems ............................................8-9
Friction-locked blind rivets ..........................................4-48
Fully articulated rotor ..................................................2-18
Fully articulated rotor system ......................................1-44
Fuselage ............................................................... 1-8, 1-42
Fuselage stations ..........................................................1-39

G
Galling ..........................................................................4-91
Gap-filling adhesive .....................................................6-10
Gap seals ......................................................................1-35
Gas cylinders ................................................................5-10
Gas metal arc welding .......................................... 5-3, 5-22
Gas tungsten arc welding ...............................................5-3
Gas welding ...................................................................5-2
Gas welding and cutting equipment ...............................5-7
Gas welding procedures ...............................................5-15
Generator controls ........................................................9-34

Functions of generator control systems ....................9-35
Differential voltage ...............................................9-35
Overexcitation protection .....................................9-35
Overvoltage protection .........................................9-35
Parallel generator operations ................................9-35
Reverse current sensing ........................................9-35
Voltage regulation ................................................9-35

Generator controls for high output generators .........9-35
Generator controls for low-output generators ..........9-36

Carbon pile regulators ...........................................9-36
Current limiter ......................................................9-37
Reverse-current relay ............................................9-38
Three-unit regulators ............................................9-37


 I-6

Voltage regulator ..................................................9-37
Theory of Generator Control ....................................9-34

Glass fiber reinforced plastics ......................................7-52
Glued joint inspection ....................................................6-4
Glue line .......................................................................6-10
Glues (adhesives) .........................................................6-10
Gouge ...........................................................................4-91
Governor ......................................................................2-29
Gravity ...........................................................................2-7
Gravity-feed gun ............................................................8-7
Gray enamel undercoat ..................................................8-4
Greige .............................................................................3-3
Grinding wheels ...........................................................4-13
Grommets ............................................................. 3-6, 3-21
Groove weld .................................................................5-28
Ground effect ...............................................................2-22
Gussets .........................................................................3-21
Gyroscopic forces ........................................................2-19

H
Hand cutting tools ........................................................4-13
Hand forming ...............................................................4-74
Handling of the torch ...................................................5-13
Hand-operated shrinker and stretcher ..........................4-27
Hand rivet set ...............................................................4-36
Hand tools .......................................................... 4-36, 7-19
Hardwood form blocks ................................................4-28
Heat blanket .................................................................7-24
Heat bonder ..................................................................7-24
Heating .........................................................................7-54
Heat lamp .....................................................................7-24
Heat press forming .......................................................7-24
Heat sources .................................................................7-22
Helicopter power systems ............................................2-34
Helicopter structures ....................................................1-40
Helicopter vibration .....................................................2-31
Helium ............................................................................5-7
Hex nut and wing nut temporary sheet fasteners .........4-30
High frequency vibration .............................................2-31
High rush-in circuits ....................................................9-98
High-speed aerodynamics ............................................2-15
Hi-Lite® fastening system ...........................................4-51
Hi-Lok® and Huck-Spin® Lockbolt fasteners ............7-46
Hi-Lok® fastening system ...........................................4-51
Hi-Tigue® fastening system ........................................4-51
Hole drilling .................................................................4-14
Hole duplicator ...............................................................4-7
Hole preparation ................................................. 4-40, 4-56
Hole transfer .................................................................4-40
Honeycomb ..................................................................7-11
Horizontal stabilizer stations ........................................1-39

Hoses ............................................................................5-11
Hot air system ..............................................................7-24
Hot dimpling ................................................................4-43
Hovering flight .............................................................2-20
Huck blind bolt system ................................................4-54
Humidity ........................................................................2-3

Absolute .....................................................................2-3
Relative .......................................................................2-3

Hydrogen ........................................................................5-7
Hydromechanical control .............................................2-14
Hydropress forming .....................................................4-25

I
Impedance ....................................................................9-15
Inclusion .......................................................................4-91
Inductive circuits ..........................................................9-98
Injector torch ..................................................................5-9
Inspection .....................................................................4-50
Inspection for corrosion ...............................................4-93
Inspection of damage ...................................................4-90
Inspection of riveted joints ...........................................4-92
Inspection openings ...................................................4-108
Inspection rings ..............................................................3-6
Installation of high-shear fasteners ..............................4-50
Installation of rivets .....................................................4-33
Installation procedure ...................................................4-52
Installation procedures .................................................7-57

J
Joggling ........................................................................4-81
Junkers, Hugo ................................................................1-3

K
Keeping weight to a minimum .....................................4-89
Kett saw .........................................................................4-8
Kevlar® ..........................................................................7-4

L
Lacquers .........................................................................8-4
Laminated structures ......................................................7-2
Landing gear ...................................................... 1-35, 1-36
Landing gear repairs ....................................................5-34
Lap joints .....................................................................5-32
Lap joint weld ..............................................................5-29
Lap or scab patch .........................................................4-97
Large coating containers ................................................8-7
Lateral stability ............................................................2-11
Layout method .............................................................4-73
Layout or flat pattern development ..............................4-60
Layout tools ...................................................................4-4


I-7

Layup materials ............................................................7-19
Layup process (typical laminated wet layup) ..............7-28
Layups ..........................................................................7-26
Layup tapes ..................................................................7-21
Layup techniques .........................................................7-28
Leg ...............................................................................4-59
Lift ..................................................................................2-7
Lightening holes ...........................................................4-82
Lighting and adjusting the torch ..................................5-13
Lightning protection fibers ............................................7-6
Lilienthal, otto ................................................................1-2
Linseed oil ......................................................................8-3
Location and placement of marks ................................8-17
Lockbolt fastening systems ..........................................4-52

Inspection .................................................................4-53
Removal ...................................................................4-53

Longeron repair ..........................................................4-104
Longitudinal stability .....................................................2-9

M
Machining processes and equipment ...........................7-49
Magnesium welding .....................................................5-19
Main rotor system ........................................................1-43

Rigid .........................................................................1-44
Semirigid ..................................................................1-44

Main rotor transmission ...............................................2-35
Maintaining original contour .......................................4-89
Maintaining original strength .......................................4-87
Maintenance .................................................................1-38
Maintenance manual ....................................................2-40
Major components of a laminate ....................................7-2
Making straight line bends ...........................................4-60
Male and female die forming .......................................7-55
Manual foot-operated sheet metal shrinker ..................4-27
Manufacturer’s inspection program .............................2-62
Manufacturer’s service information .............................2-40
Manufacturing and in-service damage .........................7-13
Marking method ...........................................................2-33
Marking tools .................................................................4-4
Masking and applying the trim ....................................8-16
Masking for the trim ....................................................8-16
Masking materials ........................................................8-16
Materials ........................................................................6-7
Matrix imperfections ....................................................7-13
Matrix materials .............................................................7-6
Maule punch tester .......................................................3-11
Mechanical control .......................................................2-14
Mechanical-lock blind rivets ........................................4-48
Medium frequency vibration ........................................2-31
Metal decals with cellophane backing .........................8-18
Metal decals with no adhesive .....................................8-18

Metal decals with paper backing ..................................8-18
Methylene chloride ........................................................8-2
Methyl Ethyl Ketone (MEK) .........................................8-2
Microshavers ................................................................4-39
Mineral spirits ................................................................8-3
Minor core damage (filler and potting repairs) ............7-34
Mixing equipment ........................................................8-10
Mixing resins ...............................................................7-30
Moisture detector .........................................................7-19
Monocoque ....................................................................1-9
Monospar .....................................................................1-12
Motion ............................................................................2-3
Motors ..........................................................................9-98
Multiple pass welding ..................................................5-26
Multispar ............................................................ 1-12, 1-13

N
NACA method of double flush riveting .......................4-46
Nacelles ........................................................................1-19
Nacelle station ..............................................................1-39
Naphtha ..........................................................................8-3
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics 
(NACA) ........................................................................4-46
Negligible damage .......................................................4-91
Neutral axis ..................................................................4-59
Neutral flame ...............................................................5-13
Neutron radiography ....................................................7-19
Newton’s laws of motion ...............................................2-3
Nibblers ..........................................................................4-9
Nick ..............................................................................4-91
Nicopress® process......................................................2-41
No bleedout ..................................................................7-29
Nondestructive inspection (NDI) of composites ..........7-15
Nonwoven (knitted or stitched) .....................................7-4
NOTAR ........................................................................1-46
Notcher .........................................................................4-12
Numbering systems ......................................................1-39

O
Offset flapping hinge ...................................................2-31
Ohm’s Law .....................................................................9-2
Open and closed bends .................................................4-73
Open and closed skin area repair .................................4-97
Open angle ...................................................................4-60
Open assembly time .....................................................6-11
Open end bend (less than 90°) .....................................4-74
Open wiring .................................................................9-78
Opposition to current flow of AC ................................9-12

Apparent power ........................................................9-20
Inductive reactance ...................................................9-12
Parallel AC circuits ..................................................9-18


 I-8

Power in AC circuits ................................................9-20
Resistance .................................................................9-12
True power ...............................................................9-20

Optical considerations ..................................................7-54
Orange peel ..................................................................8-14
Other aircraft inspection and maintenance 
programs ......................................................................2-65
Outside the member .....................................................4-99
Oven .............................................................................7-22
Overhead position welding ..........................................5-29
Oxidizing flame ...........................................................5-13
Oxy-acetylene cutting ..................................................5-14
Oxy-acetylene welding of ferrous metals ....................5-16
Oxy-acetylene welding of nonferrous metals ..............5-17
Oxygen ...........................................................................5-7

P
Paint booth .....................................................................8-6
Paint finishes ................................................................8-19
Paint system compatibility ...........................................8-19
Paint touchup ...............................................................8-19
Paper decals .................................................................8-18
Parasite drag ...................................................................2-8
Paste adhesives ...............................................................7-9
Patches .........................................................................4-97
Patch installation on the aircraft ..................................7-42
Peel ply .........................................................................7-21
Pens ................................................................................4-4
Perforated release film .................................................7-21
Periodic maintenance inspections ................................2-60
Phenolic resin .................................................................7-7
Piccolo former ..............................................................4-26
Pin fastening systems (high-shear fasteners) ...............4-50
Pinholes ........................................................................8-14
Pinked edge ....................................................................3-3
Pitting ...........................................................................4-91
Plasma arc cutting ..........................................................5-7
Plasma arc welding ........................................................5-6
Plastic media blasting (PMB) ......................................8-21
Plug patch .....................................................................6-21
Ply ..................................................................................3-3
Ply orientation warp clock ...........................................7-29
Plywood skin repairs ....................................................6-20
Pneumatic circular cutting saw ......................................4-8
Pneumatic drill motors .................................................4-15
Pneumatic rivet gun .....................................................4-37
Polishing ......................................................................7-57
Polybenzimidazoles (PBI) .............................................7-8
Polyester fabric repairs ................................................3-23
Polyester resins ..............................................................7-7
Polyether ether ketone (PEEK) ......................................7-8

Polyimides......................................................................7-7
Polyurethane ..................................................................8-5
Poor adhesion ...............................................................8-13
Pop rivets .....................................................................4-56
Portable power drills ....................................................4-15
Power factor .................................................................9-20
Powerplant ......................................................... 1-42, 2-34
Powerplant stations ......................................................1-39
Power systems ..............................................................9-41
Power tools...................................................................4-37
Preflight ........................................................................2-60
Pre-impregnated products (prepregs) .............................7-8
Preparation of wood for gluing ....................................6-11
Preparing glues for use .................................................6-11
Prepreg .........................................................................7-27
Press brake ...................................................................4-23
Pressing or clamping time ............................................6-11
Pressure ..........................................................................2-2
Pressure on the joint .....................................................6-12
Pressure regulators .........................................................5-7
Pressurization ...............................................................1-10
Primary flight controls .................................................2-11
Primary flight control surfaces .....................................1-24
Primer .............................................................................3-7
Primer and paint ...........................................................8-10
Primers ...........................................................................8-3
Profile drag .....................................................................2-8
Progressive inspection .................................................2-60
Protective equipment for personnel .............................8-22
Puddle ..........................................................................5-15
Pull-type blind bolt ......................................................4-54
Pulse echo ultrasonic inspection ..................................7-18
Punches ..........................................................................4-5

R
Radiography .................................................................7-18
Radius dimpling ...........................................................4-43
Radome repairs ............................................................7-41
Reamers ........................................................................4-19
Rebalancing methods ...................................................2-38
Rebalancing procedures ...............................................2-38
Reciprocating engine ...................................................2-34
Reciprocating saw ..........................................................4-8
Red Baron’s Fokker DR-1 .............................................1-4
Red iron oxide ................................................................8-3
Regulators ....................................................................5-10
Reinforcing tape .............................................................3-5
Relays ...........................................................................9-99
Release agents ..............................................................7-21
Relief hole location ......................................................4-73
Removal of decals ........................................................8-19


I-9

Removal of mechanically locked blind rivets ..............4-50
Removal of pin rivets ...................................................4-50
Removal of rivets .........................................................4-45
Repairability of sheet metal structure ..........................4-92
Repair layout ................................................................4-33
Repair material selection ..............................................4-93
Repair of lightening holes ............................................4-99
Repair of steel tubing aircraft structure by welding .....5-32
Repair of stressed skin structure ..................................4-94
Repair of wood aircraft components ............................6-13
Repair of wood aircraft structures ..................................6-7
Repair parts layout .......................................................4-93
Repair safety ................................................................7-53
Repairs to a pressurized area ......................................4-101
Replacement of a panel ................................................4-99
Replacing rivets ...........................................................4-46
Required inspections ....................................................2-60
Resin injection repairs ..................................................7-40
Respiratory protection ..................................................7-53
Reusable sheet metal fasteners .....................................4-29
Rib and web repair .....................................................4-105

Bracing .......................................................................3-5
Lacing .......................................................................3-18
Lacing cord .................................................................3-5

Rigging .........................................................................2-16
Checks ......................................................................2-48
Fixtures .....................................................................2-45
Specifications ...........................................................2-39

Right angle and 45° drill motors ..................................4-15
Rigid rotor ....................................................................2-18
Rivet

Cutter ........................................................................4-36
Head shape ...............................................................4-31
Layout example ........................................................4-35
Length .......................................................................4-33
Nut ............................................................................4-56
Pitch ..........................................................................4-35
Selection ...................................................................4-94
Sets/headers ..............................................................4-39
Spacers........................................................................4-4
Spacing .....................................................................4-34
Spacing and edge distance ........................................4-94
Strength ....................................................................4-33

Riveting procedure .......................................................4-40
Room temperature curing ............................................7-32
Rotary machine ............................................................4-24
Rotary punch press .......................................................4-11
Rotary-wing .................................................................2-17
Rotary-wing aircraft .......................................................1-5
Rotor systems ...............................................................2-18

Rudder ..........................................................................1-27
Ruddervator ..................................................................1-28

S
Safety in the paint shop ................................................8-21
Sags and runs ...............................................................8-14
Sandbag bumping .........................................................4-81
Sandbags ......................................................................4-28
Sandwich structures ........................................... 7-10, 7-34
Saturation techniques ...................................................7-30
Sawing..........................................................................7-55
Scales .............................................................................4-4
Scarf patch ...................................................................6-24
Score ............................................................................4-91
Scratch ..........................................................................4-91
Screws and nutplates in composite structures ..............7-48
Scroll shears .................................................................4-10
Seams ...........................................................................3-16
Seam welding .................................................................5-6
Selvage edge ..................................................................3-3
Semicrystalline thermoplastics ......................................7-8
Semimonocoque .............................................................1-9
Semirigid rotor .............................................................2-18
Sequence for painting a single-engine or light twin 
airplane .........................................................................8-13
Series wound DC generators ........................................9-32
Servo tab ......................................................................1-32
Setback (SB) ................................................................4-60
Sewing thread .................................................................3-6
Seyboth ........................................................................3-11
Shear .............................................................................,1-7
Shear strength and bearing strength .............................4-88
Sheet metal forming and flat pattern layout 
terminology ..................................................................4-59
Sheet metal hammers and mallets ................................4-28
Sheet metal holding devices .........................................4-28
Sheet metal repair ........................................................4-86
Shielded metal arc welding ............................................5-2
Shop tools.......................................................................4-9
Shotbags and weights ...................................................7-32
Shrinking ............................................................ 4-58, 4-76
Shrinking and stretching tools .....................................4-27
Shrinking blocks ..........................................................4-28
Shrinking tools .............................................................4-27
Shrink tape ...................................................................7-32
Sight line ......................................................................4-60
Silver soldering ............................................................5-21
Single rotor helicopter ..................................................2-17
Single side vacuum bagging ........................................7-31
Single spread ................................................................6-10


 I-10

Siphon feed gun .............................................................8-7
Size requirements for different aircraft ........................8-18
Skids .............................................................................1-42
Skin protection .............................................................7-53
Skis ...............................................................................1-37
Slats ..............................................................................1-30
Sleeve bolts ..................................................................4-56
Slip roll former .............................................................4-23
Snake attachment .........................................................4-16
Soft or harsh flames .....................................................5-13
Soldering ......................................................................5-21
Solenoids ......................................................................9-99
Solid laminates .............................................................7-37
Solid release film .........................................................7-21
Solid shank rivet ..........................................................4-31
Solid-state regulators ...................................................9-40
Solutions to heat sink problems ...................................7-26
Spar repair ..................................................................4-104
Special fabric fasteners ..................................................3-6
Specialized repairs .....................................................4-107
Speed brakes ................................................................1-30
Spin forming ................................................................4-26
Splayed patch ...............................................................6-20
Spoiler ..........................................................................1-30
Spot welding ..................................................................5-6
Spray dust.....................................................................8-16
Spray equipment ............................................................8-6
Spray gun operation .....................................................8-11
Spray guns ......................................................................8-7
Spraying .........................................................................8-5
Spring-back ..................................................................2-45
Squaring shear ................................................................4-9
Stabilator ......................................................................1-27
Stability ..........................................................................2-9
Stability augmentation systems (SAS) .........................2-31
Stabilizers .....................................................................1-24
Stabilizer systems .........................................................2-30
Stain .............................................................................4-91
Stainless steel ...............................................................5-17
Stall fence .....................................................................1-34
Static stability .................................................................2-9
Steel ..............................................................................5-16
Step drill bits ................................................................4-17
Storage and handling ....................................................7-54
Storage of finishing materials ......................................8-21
Straight extension .........................................................4-16
Straight line bends ........................................................4-74
Strength characteristics ..................................................7-2
Stress analysis ................................................................1-7
Stresses applied to rivets ..............................................4-34
Stresses in structural members .......................................4-2

Stretch forming .................................................. 4-24, 7-55
Stretching ........................................................... 4-58, 4-77
Stretching tools ............................................................4-27
Stretching with V-block method ..................................4-75
Stringer repair ............................................................4-102
Stringers .........................................................................1-9
Stripping the finish .......................................................8-20
Structural alignment .....................................................2-48
Structural fasteners .......................................................4-31
Structural Repair Manual (SRM) .................................2-40
Structural stresses ...........................................................1-6
Structural support during repair ...................................4-92
Subsonic flow.................................................................2-4
Suitable wood .................................................................6-7
Support tooling and molds ...........................................7-20
Surface patch ................................................................6-20
Surface preparation for touchup ...................................8-20
Surfaces ........................................................................8-10
Surface tape ....................................................................3-5
Swage-type terminals ...................................................2-41
Swash plate assembly ..................................................2-28
Switches .......................................................................9-96

Double-pole double-throw (DPDT) .........................9-98
Double-pole single-throw (DPST) ...........................9-98
Double-throw switches .............................................9-98
Precision (micro) switches .......................................9-99
Rotary switches ........................................................9-99
Single-pole double-throw (SPDT)............................9-98
Single-pole single-throw (SPST) .............................9-98
Spring loaded switches .............................................9-98
Toggle and rocker switches ......................................9-98
Two position switch .................................................9-98

Symmetry check ...........................................................2-51
Synthetic enamel ............................................................8-4
System air filters ............................................................8-7

T
Tabs ..............................................................................1-31
Tail cone .......................................................................1-22
Tail rotor tracking ........................................................2-33
Tail wheel gear .............................................................1-37
Tapered shank bolt .......................................................4-56
Technical standard order ................................................3-4
Tee joints ......................................................................5-31
Temperature variations in repair zone .........................7-25
Tension ..........................................................................,1-7
Tension regulators ........................................................2-45
Terms used in the glue process ....................................6-10
Testing glued joints ......................................................6-13
Thermal survey ............................................................7-26

of repair area .............................................................7-25


I-11

Thermocouple placement .............................................7-25
Thermocouples .............................................................7-25
Thermography ..............................................................7-19
Thermoplastic resins ......................................................7-8
Thermoplastics .............................................................7-54
Thermosetting plastics .................................................7-54
Thermosetting resins ......................................................7-6
Thinners .........................................................................8-3
Thixotropic agents .........................................................7-9
Throatless shear ...........................................................4-10
Throttle .........................................................................2-29
Through transmission ultrasonic inspection ................7-17
Thrust .............................................................................2-7
Tig welding ..................................................................5-22

4130 steel tubing ......................................................5-23
Aluminum .................................................................5-24
Magnesium ...............................................................5-24
Stainless steel ...........................................................5-23
Titanium ...................................................................5-24

Titanium .......................................................................4-85
Toluene ..........................................................................8-2
Topcoats .........................................................................3-7

Catalysts .....................................................................3-7
Fungicide ....................................................................3-8
Mildewicide ................................................................3-8
Rejuvenator ................................................................3-8
Retarder ......................................................................3-8
Thinners ......................................................................3-7

Torch brazing of aluminum .........................................5-20
Torch brazing of steel ..................................................5-19
Torch tips .......................................................................5-9
Torque compensation ...................................................2-19
Torque tubes .................................................................2-47
Torsion ..........................................................................,1-7
Total developed width (TDW) .....................................4-60
Trailing edge and transition area patch repairs ............7-40
Trailing edge repair ....................................................4-107
Transfer punch ...............................................................4-6
Translating tendency ....................................................2-22
Transmission ................................................................1-42
Transmission system ....................................................2-35
Transparent plastics .....................................................7-54
Transverse pitch ...........................................................4-35
Tricycle gear ................................................................1-38
Trim controls ................................................................2-11

Balance tabs ..............................................................2-12
Servo tabs .................................................................2-12
Spring tabs ................................................................2-12

Truss ...............................................................................1-8
Tube splicing with inside sleeve reinforcement ...........5-33
Tube splicing with outer split sleeve reinforcement ....5-33

Turbine engines ............................................................1-42
Turnbuckles ..................................................................2-45
Turpentine ......................................................................8-3
Two hole ......................................................................4-15
Tying wire bundles ......................................................9-88
Type certificate data sheet ...........................................2-39
Types of damage and defects .......................................4-90
Types of drill bits .........................................................4-17
Types of fiber .................................................................7-4
Types of welding ............................................................5-2
Typical repairs for aircraft structures ...........................4-98

U
Ultrasonic bondtester inspection ..................................7-18
Ultrasonic inspection ...................................................7-17
Unidirectional (tape) ......................................................7-3
Upsetting ......................................................................4-91
Urethane .........................................................................8-4
Urethane coating ............................................................8-5

V
Vacuum bag .................................................................7-22
Vacuum bagging techniques ........................................7-31
Vacuum bag materials ..................................................7-21
Vacuum compaction table ............................................7-22
Vacuum equipment ......................................................7-22
Vacuum forming with a female form ...........................7-55
Vacuum forming without forms ...................................7-55
Varnish ...........................................................................8-3
V-blocks .......................................................................4-28
Velocity ..........................................................................2-3
Vertical flight ...............................................................2-23
Vertical position welding .............................................5-29
Vertical stabilizer stations ............................................1-39
Very light jet ..................................................................1-5
Vinyl ester resin .............................................................7-7
Vinyl film decals ..........................................................8-18
Viscosity measuring cup ................................................8-9
Visual inspection ..........................................................7-15
Vortex generators .........................................................1-34

W
Warp clock .....................................................................7-3
Wash primers .................................................................8-3
Water line .....................................................................1-39
Web members ..............................................................1-10
Weight ............................................................................2-7
Weight ............................................................................2-7
Welded joints using oxy-acetylene torch .....................5-30
Welding ..........................................................................5-1

