
9-1

Chapter 9

Aircraft Electrical System
Introduction
The satisfactory performance of any modern aircraft depends 
to a very great degree on the continuing reliability of electrical 
systems and subsystems. Improperly or carelessly installed 
or maintained wiring can be a source of both immediate 
and potential danger. The continued proper performance of 
electrical systems depends on the knowledge and technique 
of the mechanic who installs, inspects, and maintains the 
electrical system wires and cables.


9-2



E = 24 V DC 

R = 12Ω

I = 2A

Figure 9-1. Ohm's Law used to calculate how much current a lamp 
will pass when connected to a 24-volt DC power source.

Ohm’s Law
Ohm’s Law describes the basic mathematical relationships 
of electricity. The law was named after German Physicist 
George Simon Ohm (1789–1854). Basically, Ohm’s Law 
states that the current (electron flow) through a conductor 
is directly proportional to the voltage (electrical pressure) 
applied to that conductor and inversely proportional to 
the resistance of the conductor. The unit used to measure 
resistance is called the ohm. The symbol for the ohm is the 
Greek letter omega (Ω). In mathematical formulas, the capital 
letter R refers to resistance. The resistance of a conductor and 
the voltage applied to it determine the number of amperes 
of current flowing through the conductor. Thus, 1 ohm of 
resistance limits the current flow to 1 ampere in a conductor 
to which a voltage of 1 volt is applied. The primary formula 
derived from Ohm’s Law is: E = I × R (E = electromotive 
force measured in volts, I = current flow measured in amps, 
and R = resistance measured in ohms). This formula can also 
be written to solve for current or resistance:
 

I = E
 R

R = E
 I

Ohm’s Law provides a foundation of mathematical formulas 
that predict how electricity responds to certain conditions. 
[Figure 9-1] For example, Ohm’s Law can be used to 
calculate that a lamp of 12 Ohms (Ω) passes a current of 
2 amps when connected to a 24-volt direct current (DC) 
power source. 

Example 1
A 28-volt landing light circuit has a lamp with 4 ohms of 
resistance. Calculate the total current of the circuit.



I = E
 R

I =   28 volts
      4Ω

I = 7 amps

Example 2
A 28-volt deice boot circuit has a current of 6.5 amps. 
Calculate the resistance of the deice boot.

R = E
 I

R =   28 volts
        6.5 amps

R = 4.31Ω
 
Example 3
A taxi light has a resistance of 4.9Ω and a total current of 
2.85 amps. Calculate the system voltage.
 
E = I × R

E = 2.85 × 4.9Ω

E = 14 volts

Whenever troubleshooting aircraft electrical circuits, 
it is always valuable to consider Ohm’s Law. A good 
understanding of the relationship between resistance and 
current flow can help one determine if a circuit contains an 
open or a short. Remembering that a low resistance means 
increased current can help explain why circuit breakers pop 
or fuses blow. In almost all cases, aircraft loads are wired in 
parallel to each other; therefore, there is a constant voltage 
supplied to all loads and the current flow through a load is a 
function of that load’s resistance. 

Figure 9-2 illustrates several ways of using Ohm’s Law for 
the calculation of current, voltage, and resistance.

Current
Electrical current is the movement of electrons. This electron 
movement is referred to as current, flow, or current flow. In 
practical terms, this movement of electrons must take place 
within a conductor (wire). Current is typically measured in 
amps. The symbol for current is I and the symbol for amps is A. 

The current flow is actually the movement of the free 
electrons found within conductors. Common conductors 


9-3

E

I     X     R

E

I     X     R

E

I     X     R

A

B

C

To find I (amperes), 
place thumb over I 
and divide E by R 
as indicated.

To find R (ohms), 
place thumb over 
R and divide as 
indicated.

To find E (volts), 
place thumb over 
E and multiply as 
indicated.

Figure 9-2. Ohm's Law chart. 

Figure 9-3. Electron flow.

include copper, silver, aluminum, and gold. The term “free 
electron” describes a condition in some atoms where the 
outer electrons are loosely bound to their parent atom. These 
loosely bound electrons are easily motivated to move in a 
given direction when an external source, such as a battery, 
is applied to the circuit. These electrons are attracted to the 
positive terminal of the battery, while the negative terminal 
is the source of the electrons. So, the measure of current is 
actually the number of electrons moving through a conductor 
in a given amount of time.

The internationally accepted unit for current is the ampere 
(A). One ampere (A) of current is equivalent to 1 coulomb 
(C) of charge passing through a conductor in 1 second. One 
coulomb of charge equals 6.28 × 1018 electrons. Obviously, 
the unit of amperes is a much more convenient term to use 
than coulombs. The unit of coulombs is simply too small to 
be practical. 

When current flow is in one direction, it is called direct 
current (DC). Later in the text, the form of current that 
periodically oscillates back and forth within the circuit is 

discussed. The present discussion is concerned only with 
the use of DC. It should be noted that as with the movement 
of any mass, electron movement (current flow) only occurs 
when there is a force present to push the electrons. This force 
is commonly called voltage (described in more detail in the 
next section). When a voltage is applied across the conductor, 
an electromotive force creates an electric field within the 
conductor, and a current is established. The electrons do not 
move in a straight direction, but undergo repeated collisions 
with other nearby atoms within a conductor. These collisions 
usually knock other free electrons from their atoms, and these 
electrons move on toward the positive end of the conductor 
with an average velocity called the drift velocity, which is 
relatively low speed. To understand the nearly instantaneous 
speed of the effect of the current, it is helpful to visualize a 
long tube filled with steel balls. [Figure 9-3] 

It can be seen that a ball introduced in one end of the tube, 
which represents the conductor, immediately causes a ball 
to be emitted at the opposite end of the tube. Thus, electric 
current can be viewed as instantaneous, even though it is the 
result of a relatively slow drift of electrons. 

Conventional Current Theory and Electron Theory 
There are two competing schools of thought regarding the 
flow of electricity. The two explanations are the conventional 
current theory and the electron theory. Both theories 
describe the movement of electrons through a conductor. 
They simply explain the direction current moves. Typically 
during troubleshooting or the connection of electrical circuits, 
the use of either theory can be applied as long as it is used 
consistently. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
officially defines current flow using electron theory (negative 
to positive). 

The conventional current theory was initially advanced by 
Benjamin Franklin, who reasoned that current flowed out of 
a positive source into a negative source or an area that lacked 
an abundance of charge. The notation assigned to the electric 
charges was positive (+) for the abundance of charge and 
negative (−) for a lack of charge. It then seemed natural to 
visualize the flow of current as being from the positive (+) 
to the negative (−). Later discoveries were made that proved 
that just the opposite is true. Electron theory describes what 
actually happens in the case of an abundance of electrons 
flowing out of the negative (−) source to an area that lacks 


9-4

A B

Figure 9-4. Difference of pressure. 

electrons or the positive (+) source. Both conventional flow 
and electron flow are used in industry. 

Electromotive Force (Voltage)
Voltage is most easily described as electrical pressure force. 
It is the electromotive force (EMF), or the push or pressure 
from one end of the conductor to the other, that ultimately 
moves the electrons. The symbol for EMF is the capital letter 
E. EMF is always measured between two points and voltage 
is considered a value between two points. For example, 
across the terminals of the typical aircraft battery, voltage 
can be measured as the potential difference of 12 volts or 
24 volts. That is to say that between the two terminal posts 
of the battery, there is a voltage available to push current 
through a circuit. Free electrons in the negative terminal of 
the battery move toward the excessive number of positive 
charges in the positive terminal. The net result is a flow or 
current through a conductor. There cannot be a flow in a 
conductor unless there is an applied voltage from a battery, 
generator, or ground power unit. The potential difference, 
or the voltage across any two points in an electrical system, 
can be determined by: 

V1 – V2 = VDrop

Example
The voltage at one point is 14 volts. The voltage at a second 
point in the circuit is 12.1 volts. To calculate the voltage drop, 
use the formula above to get a total voltage drop of 1.9 volts.

 Figure 9-4 illustrates the flow of electrons of electric current. 
Two interconnected water tanks demonstrate that when a 
difference of pressure exists between the two tanks, water 
flows until the two tanks are equalized. Figure 9-4 shows 
the level of water in tank A to be at a higher level, reading 
10 pounds per square inch (psi) (higher potential energy), 
than the water level in tank B, reading 2 psi (lower potential 
energy). Between the two tanks, there is 8 psi potential 
difference. If the valve in the interconnecting line between the 
tanks is opened, water flows from tank A into tank B until the 
level of water (potential energy) of both tanks is equalized. 
It is important to note that it was not the pressure in tank A  

that caused the water to flow; rather, it was the difference 
in pressure between tank A and tank B that caused the flow. 
This comparison illustrates the principle that electrons move, 
when a path is available, from a point of excess electrons 
(higher potential energy) to a point deficient in electrons 
(lower potential energy). The force that causes this movement 
is the potential difference in electrical energy between the two 
points. This force is called the electrical pressure (voltage), 
the potential difference, or the electromotive force (electron 
moving force).

Resistance
The two fundamental properties of current and voltage 
are related by a third property known as resistance. In any 
electrical circuit, when voltage is applied to it, a current 
results. The resistance of the conductor determines the 
amount of current that flows under the given voltage. In 
general, the greater the circuit resistance, the less the current. 
If the resistance is reduced, then the current will increase. 
This relation is linear in nature and is known as Ohm’s Law. 
An example would be if the resistance of a circuit is doubled, 
and the voltage is held constant, then the current through the 
resistor is cut in half. 

There is no distinct dividing line between conductors and 
insulators; under the proper conditions, all types of material 
conduct some current. Materials offering a resistance to 
current flow midway between the best conductors and the 
poorest conductors (insulators) are sometimes referred to 
as semiconductors and find their greatest application in the 
field of transistors.

The best conductors are materials, chiefly metals, that possess 
a large number of free electrons. Conversely, insulators are 
materials having few free electrons. The best conductors are 
silver, copper, gold, and aluminum, but some nonmetals, such 
as carbon and water, can be used as conductors. Materials 
such as rubber, glass, ceramics, and plastics are such poor 
conductors that they are usually used as insulators. The 
current flow in some of these materials is so low that it is 
usually considered zero.

Factors Affecting Resistance
The resistance of a metallic conductor is dependent on the 
type of conductor material. It has been pointed out that certain 
metals are commonly used as conductors because of the 
large number of free electrons in their outer orbits. Copper 
is usually considered the best available conductor material, 
since a copper wire of a particular diameter offers a lower 
resistance to current flow than an aluminum wire of the same 
diameter. However, aluminum is much lighter than copper, 
and for this reason, as well as cost considerations, aluminum 
is often used when the weight factor is important.


9-5

+

+

2 f
ee

t

0.5
 A

mp
 ( 2

 O
hm

s)

1 f
oo

t

1 A
mp

 (1
 O

hm
)

N

S

Motion of conductor

EMF

Figure 9-5. Resistance varies with length of conductor.
Figure 9-6. Inducing an EMF in a conductor.

The resistance of a metallic conductor is directly proportional 
to its length. The longer the length of a given size of wire, the 
greater the resistance. Figure 9-5 shows two wire conductors 
of different lengths. If 1 volt of electrical pressure is applied 
across the two ends of the conductor that is 1 foot in length 
and the resistance to the movement of free electrons is 
assumed to be 1 ohm, the current flow is limited to 1 ampere. 
If the same size conductor is doubled in length, the same 
electrons set in motion by the 1 volt applied now find twice 
the resistance.

Electromagnetic Generation of Power
Electrical energy can be produced through a number of 
methods. Common methods include the use of light, pressure, 
heat, chemical, and electromagnetic induction. Of these 
processes, electromagnetic induction is most responsible for 
the generation of the majority of the electrical power used 
by humans. Virtually all mechanical devices (generators and 
alternators) that produce electrical power employ the process 
of electromagnetic induction. The use of light, pressure, 
heat, and chemical sources for electrical power is found on 
aircraft but produce a minimal amount of all the electrical 
power consumed during a typical flight.

In brief, light can produce electricity using a solar cell 
(photovoltaic cell). These cells contain a certain chemical 
that converts light energy into voltage/current. 

Using pressure to generate electrical power is commonly 
known as the piezoelectric effect. The piezoelectric effect 
(piezo or piez taken from Greek: to press; pressure; to 
squeeze) is a result of the application of mechanical pressure 
on a dielectric or nonconducting crystal.

Chemical energy can be converted into electricity, most 
commonly in the form of a battery. A primary battery 

produces electricity using two different metals in a chemical 
solution like alkaline electrolyte. A chemical reaction exists 
between the metals which frees more electrons in one metal 
than in the other.

Heat used to produce electricity creates the thermoelectric 
effect. When a device called a thermocouple is subjected to 
heat, a voltage is produced. A thermocouple is a junction 
between two different metals that produces a voltage related 
to a temperature difference. If the thermocouple is connected 
to a complete circuit, a current also flows. Thermocouples are 
often found on aircraft as part of a temperature monitoring 
system, such as a cylinder head temperature gauge. 

Electromagnetic induction is the process of producing a 
voltage (EMF) by moving a magnetic field in relationship 
to a conductor. As shown in Figure 9-6, when a conductor 
(wire) is moved through a magnetic field, an EMF is produced 
in the conductor. If a complete circuit is connected to the 
conductor, the voltage also produces a current flow. 

One single conductor does not produce significant voltage/
current via electromagnetic induction. [Figure 9-6] In 
practice, instead of a single wire, a coil of wire is moved 
through the magnetic field of a strong magnet. This produces 
a greater electrical output. In many cases, the magnetic field 
is created by using a powerful electromagnet. This allows 
for the production of a greater voltage/current due to the 
stronger magnetic field produced by the electromagnet when 
compared to an ordinary magnet.

Please note that this text often refers to voltage/current in 
regards to electrical power. Remember voltage (electrical 
pressure) must be present to produce a current (electron flow). 
Hence, the output energy generated through the process 
of electromagnetic induction always consists of voltage. 


9-6

S

N

S

N

S

N

Motion of magnet Galvanometer

A

B

C

Motion of magnet

Coil

Magnet at rest

I

I

I

I

S

N
Indu

ced
 EM

F

Flux fo
rward

Inducted

EMF

Condu
ctor 

moved
 up

N

S
A

B

Figure 9-7. Inducing a current flow.

Figure 9-8. An application of the generator left-hand rule.

Figure 9-9. Voltage induced in a loop.

Current also results when a complete circuit is connected to 
that voltage. Electrical power is produced when there is both 
electrical pressure E (EMF) and current (I). Power = Current 
× Voltage (P = I × E)

It is the relative motion between a conductor and a magnetic 
field that causes current to flow in the conductor. Either the 
conductor or magnet can be moving or stationary. When a 
magnet and its field are moved through a coiled conductor, 
as shown in Figure 9-7, a DC voltage with a specific polarity 
is produced. The polarity of this voltage depends on the 
direction in which the magnet is moved and the position of 
the north and south poles of the magnetic field. The generator 
left-hand rule can be used to determine the direction of 

 current flow within the conductor. [Figure 9-8] Of course, 
the direction of current flow is a function of the polarity of 
the voltage induced in to the conductor. 

In practice, producing voltage/current using the process 
of electromagnetic induction requires a rotating machine. 
Generally speaking, on all aircraft, a generator or alternator 
employs the principles of electromagnetic induction to create 
electrical power for the aircraft. Either the magnetic field 
can rotate or the conductor can rotate. [Figure 9-9] The 
rotating component is driven by a mechanical device, such 
as an aircraft engine.

During the process of electromagnetic induction, the value of 
the induced voltage/current depends on three basic factors: 

1. Number of turns in the conductor coil (more loops 
equals greater induced voltage)


9-7

N

S

N

S

Brushes

Direction of rotation

Collector rings

C1
C2

A

B

BA

A

B

Direction of
movement 
of the loop 
through the 
magnetic field

Cross section of loop

Current flow is away from readerCurrent flow is toward the readerSide of loop Side of loop +

+

Figure 9-10. Simple generator. 

2. Strength of the electromagnet (the stronger the 
magnetic field, the greater the induced voltage)

3. Speed of rotation of the conductor or magnet (the 
faster the rotation, the greater the induced voltage) 

Figure 9-10 illustrates the basics of a rotating machine used 
to produce voltage. The simple generating device consists 
of a rotating loop, marked A and B, placed between two 
magnetic poles, N and S. The ends of the loop are connected 
to two metal slip rings (collector rings), C1 and C2. Current 
is taken from the collector rings by brushes. If the loop is 
considered as separate wires, A and B, and the left-hand rule 
for generators is applied, then it can be observed that as wire 
B moves up across the field, a voltage is induced that causes 
the current to flow towards the reader. As wire A moves down 
across the field, a voltage is induced that causes the current to 
flow away from the reader. When the wires are formed into 
a loop, the voltages induced in the two sides of the loop are 
combined. Therefore, for explanatory purposes, the action 
of either conductor, A or B, while rotating in the magnetic 
field is similar to the action of the loop.

Figure 9-11 illustrates the generation of alternating current 
(AC) with a simple loop conductor rotating in a magnetic 
field. As it is rotated in a counterclockwise direction, varying 
voltages are induced in the conductive loop. 

Position 1
The conductor A moves parallel to the lines of force. Since 
it cuts no lines of force, the induced voltage is zero. As the 

conductor advances from position 1 to position 2, the induced 
voltage gradually increases. 

Position 2
The conductor is now moving in a direction perpendicular 
to the flux and cuts a maximum number of lines of force; 
therefore, a maximum voltage is induced. As the conductor 
moves beyond position 2, it cuts a decreasing amount of flux, 
and the induced voltage decreases. 

Position 3
At this point, the conductor has made half a revolution and 
again moves parallel to the lines of force, and no voltage is 
induced in the conductor. As the A conductor passes position 
3, the direction of induced voltage now reverses since the A 
conductor is moving downward, cutting flux in the opposite 
direction. As the A conductor moves across the south pole, the 
induced voltage gradually increases in a negative direction 
until it reaches position 4.

Position 4
Like position 2, the conductor is again moving perpendicular 
to the flux and generates a maximum negative voltage. 
From position 4 to position 5, the induced voltage gradually 
decreases until the voltage is zero, and the conductor and 
wave are ready to start another cycle. 

Position 5
The curve shown at position 5 is called a sine wave. It 
represents the polarity and the magnitude of the instantaneous 


9-8

Quarter turn completed

Conductors cutting directly across the magnetic field as conductor 
A passes across the north magnetic pole and B passes across the 
S pole.

S

B

A
0° 90° 180° 270°

Maximum positive voltage

360°

N

S

A

B

C1
C2

0° 90° 180° 270°

Zero voltage

Rotating conductors moving parallel to magnetic field, 
cutting minimum lines of force.

360°

Magnetic field

 Three quarters turn completed

Conductors again moving directly across magnetic field A passes
across south magnetic pole and B across N magnetic pole.

S

0° 90° 180° 270°

Maximum negative voltage

360°

N

S

B

A

0° 90° 180° 270°

Voltage drops to zero

 One half turn completed

Conductor again moving parallel to magnetic field, cutting minimum
lines of force.

360°

N

S

A
0° 90° 180° 270°

Zero voltage

Full turn completed

Conductor A has made one complete cycle and is in same position
as in position A. The generator has generated one complete cycle 
of alternating voltage or current.

360°

Position 1 Position 2

Position 3

Position 5

Position 4

C1
C2

N

C1
C2 C1

C2

B

A

N

C1
C2

B

Figure 9-11. Generation of a sine wave. 

values of the voltages generated. The horizontal baseline is 
divided into degrees, or time, and the vertical distance above 
or below the baseline represents the value of voltage at each 
particular point in the rotation of the loop.

The specific operating principles of both alternators and 
generators as they apply to aircraft is presented later in 
this text. 
 


9-9

Closed
switch

Open
switch

Operation of circuit

Wave form for DC

V
o

lt
s

Time

Wave form for AC





 V
o

lt
s 





+ 
   



Time
−

0° 90°
 180° 270° 360°

Figure 9-12. DC and AC voltage curves.

Alternating Current (AC) Introduction 
Alternating current (AC) electrical systems are found on most 
multi-engine, high performance turbine powered aircraft and 
transport category aircraft. AC is the same type of electricity 
used in industry and to power our homes. Direct current (DC) 
is used on systems that must be compatible with battery 
power, such as on light aircraft and automobiles. There are 
many benefits of AC power when selected over DC power 
for aircraft electrical systems.

AC can be transmitted over long distances more readily 
and more economically than DC, since AC voltages can be 
increased or decreased by means of transformers. Because 
more and more units are being operated electrically in 
airplanes, the power requirements are such that a number of 
advantages can be realized by using AC (especially with large 
transport category aircraft). Space and weight can be saved 
since AC devices, especially motors, are smaller and simpler 
than DC devices. In most AC motors, no brushes are required, 
and they require less maintenance than DC motors. Circuit 
breakers operate satisfactorily under loads at high altitudes in 
an AC system, whereas arcing is so excessive on DC systems 
that circuit breakers must be replaced frequently. Finally, 
most airplanes using a 24-volt DC system have special 
equipment that requires a certain amount of 400 cycle AC 
current. For these aircraft, a unit called an inverter is used to 
change DC to AC. Inverters are discussed later in this book. 

AC is constantly changing in value and polarity, or as the 
name implies, alternating. Figure 9-12 shows a graphic 
comparison of DC and AC. The polarity of DC never 
changes, and the polarity and voltage constantly change in 
AC. It should also be noted that the AC cycle repeats at given 
intervals. With AC, both voltage and current start at zero, 
increase, reach a peak, then decrease and reverse polarity. 
If one is to graph this concept, it becomes easy to see the 
alternating wave form. This wave form is typically referred 
to as a sine wave. 

Definitions
Values of AC

There are three values of AC that apply to both voltage and 
current. These values help to define the sine wave and are 
called instantaneous, peak, and effective. It should be noted 
that during the discussion of these terms, the text refers to 
voltage. But remember, the values apply to voltage and 
current in all AC circuits. 

Instantaneous 

An instantaneous voltage is the value at any instant in time 
along the AC wave. The sine wave represents a series of 
these values. The instantaneous value of the voltage varies 
from zero at 0° to maximum at 90°, back to zero at 180°, 
to maximum in the opposite direction at 270°, and to zero 
again at 360°. Any point on the sine wave is considered the 
instantaneous value of voltage. 

Peak 

The peak value is the largest instantaneous value, often 
referred to as the maximum value. The largest single positive 
value occurs after a certain period of time when the sine wave 
reaches 90°, and the largest single negative value occurs 
when the wave reaches 270°. Although important in the 
understanding of the AC sine wave, peak values are seldom 
used by aircraft technicians. 

Effective 

The effective values for voltage are always less than the 
peak (maximum) values of the sine wave and approximate 
DC voltage of the same value. For example, an AC circuit of 
24 volts and 2 amps should produce the same heat through a 
resistor as a DC circuit of 24 volts and 2 amps. The effective 
value is also known as the root mean square, or RMS value, 
which refers to the mathematical process by which the value 
is derived. 


9-10

+
  
  
  
  
  

A
ve

ra
g
e

va
lu

e

−

            Average  = 0.637 peak
 RMS (effective)  = 0.707 peak
      Peak to peak  = 2 peaks

R
M

S
 v

a
lu

e

P
e
a
k 

va
lu

e

P
e
a
k-

to
-p

e
a
k 

va
lu

e

0

One cycle
one period

(time)
One wavelength

(distance)

Second cycle

V
e
rt

ic
a
l s

ca
le

 (
vo

lta
g
e
)

Horizontal scale
(time)

Positive alternation

1T 2T 3T 4T

Negative
alternation

360°

1 second frequency = 2 cycles per second

1T

0° 90° 180° 270° 360°

1 second frequency = 8 cycles per second

270°

180°

0°

90°

Figure 9-13. Values of AC.

Figure 9-14. Cycle of voltage. 

Figure 9-15. Frequency in cycles per second. 

Most AC meters display the effective value of the AC. In 
almost all cases, the voltage and current ratings of a system 
or component are given in effective values. In other words, 
the industry ratings are based on effective values. Peak and 
instantaneous values, used only in very limited situations, 
would be stated as such. In the study of AC, any values given 
for current or voltage are assumed to be effective values 
unless otherwise specified. In practice, only the effective 
values of voltage and current are used.

The effective value is equal to .707 times the peak (maximum) 
value. Conversely, the peak value is 1.41 times the effective 
value. Thus, the 110 volt value given for AC is only 0.707 
of the peak voltage of this supply. The maximum voltage is 
approximately 155 volts (110 × 1.41 = 155 volts maximum).

How often the AC waveform repeats is known as the AC 
frequency. The frequency is typically measured in cycles per 
second (CPS) or hertz (Hz). One Hz equals one CPS. The 
time it takes for the sine wave to complete one cycle is known 
as period (P). Period is a value or time period and typically 
measured in seconds, milliseconds, or microseconds. It 
should be noted that the time period of a cycle can change 
from one system to another; it is always said that the cycle 
completes in 360° (related to the 360° of rotation of an AC 
alternator). [Figure 9-13]

Cycle Defined

A cycle is a completion of a pattern. Whenever a voltage 
or current passes through a series of changes, returns to the 
starting point, and then repeats the same series of changes, 
the series is called a cycle. When the voltage values are 
graphed, as in Figure 9-14, the complete AC cycle is 
displayed. One complete cycle is often referred to as the sine 
wave and said to be 360°. It is typical to start the sine wave 
where the voltage is zero. The voltage then increases to a 
maximum positive value, decreases to a value of zero, then  

increases to a maximum negative value, and again decreases 
to zero. The cycle repeats until the voltage is no longer 
available. There are two alternations in a complete cycle: 
the positive alternation and the negative. It should be noted 
that the polarity of the voltage reverses for each half cycle. 
Therefore, during the positive half cycle, the electron flow 
is considered to be in one direction; during the negative half 
cycle, the electrons reverse direction and flow the opposite 
way through the circuit. 

Frequency Defined

The frequency is the number of cycles of AC per second 
(CPS). The standard unit of frequency measurement is the 
Hz. [Figure 9-15] In a generator, the voltage and current 
pass through a complete cycle of values each time a coil 
or conductor passes under a north and south pole of the 
magnet. The number of cycles for each revolution of the 
coil or conductor is equal to the number of pairs of poles.  


9-11

Current

Voltage

0° 90° 180° 270° 360°

Voltage source 1 (leads source 2)

0° 90° 180° 270° 360°

Voltage source 2 (lags source 1)

Voltage source 1

0° 90° 180° 270° 360°

Voltage source 2

A. Voltage and current are in phase

B. Two voltage waves, 90° out of phase

C. Two voltage waves, 180° out of phase

Figure 9-16. In-phase and out-of-phase conditions.

The frequency, then, is equal to the number of cycles in 
one revolution multiplied by the number of revolutions  
per second. 

Period Defined 

The time required for a sine wave to complete one full 
cycle is called a period (P). A period is typically measured 
in seconds, milliseconds, or microseconds. [Figure 9-14] 
The period of a sine wave is inversely proportional to the 
frequency. That is to say that the higher the frequency, the 
shorter the period. The mathematical relationship between 
frequency and period is given as: 

Period

P = 1
 f 
 
Frequency

F = 1
 P
 
Wavelength Defined

The distance that a waveform travels during a period is 
commonly referred to as a wavelength and is indicated by the 
Greek letter lambda (λ). Wavelength is related to frequency 
by the formula:

 wave speed = wavelength 
 frequency
 
The higher the frequency is, the shorter the wavelength is. 
The measurement of wavelength is taken from one point 
on the waveform to a corresponding point on the next 
waveform. [Figure 9-14] Since wavelength is a distance, 
common units of measure include meters, centimeters, 
millimeters, or nanometers. For example, a sound wave of 
frequency 20 Hz would have wavelength of 17 meters and 
a visible red light wave of 4.3 × 10 –12 Hz would have a 
wavelength of roughly 700 nanometers. Keep in mind that 
the actual wavelength depends on the media through which 
the waveform must travel. 

Phase Relationships

Phase is the relationship between two sine waves, typically 
measured in angular degrees. For example, if there are two 
different alternators producing power, it would be easy to 
compare their individual sine waves and determine their 
phase relationship. In Figure 9-16B, there is a 90° phase 
difference between the two voltage waveforms. A phase 
relationship can be between any two sine waves. The phase 
relationship can be measured between two voltages of 
different alternators or the current and voltage produced by 
the same alternator.

Figure 9-16A shows a voltage signal and a current signal 
superimposed on the same time axis. Notice that when the 
voltage increases in the positive alternation that the current 
also increases. When the voltage reaches its peak value, so 
does the current. Both waveforms then reverse and decrease 
back to a zero magnitude, then proceed in the same manner 
in the negative direction as they did in the positive direction. 
When two waves are exactly in step with each other, they 
are said to be in phase. To be in phase, the two waveforms 
must go through their maximum and minimum points at the 
same time and in the same direction. 


9-12

115V AC 

R = 10Ω

Ammeter
I = 11.5A

A

Figure 9-17. Resistance.

When two waveforms go through their maximum and 
minimum points at different times, a phase difference exists 
between the two. In this case, the two waveforms are said 
to be out of phase with each other. The terms lead and lag 
are often used to describe the phase difference between 
waveforms. The waveform that reaches its maximum or 
minimum value first is said to lead the other waveform. 
Figure 9-16B shows this relationship. On the other hand, the 
second waveform is said to be lagging the first source. When 
a waveform is said to be leading or lagging, the difference in 
degrees is usually stated. If the two waveforms differ by 360°, 
they are said to be in phase with each other. If there is a 180° 
difference between the two signals, then they are still out of 
phase even though they are both reaching their minimum and 
maximum values at the same time. [Figure 9-16C]

Opposition to Current Flow of AC
There are three factors that can create an opposition to the flow 
of electrons (current) in an AC circuit. Resistance, similar 
to resistance of DC circuits, is measured in ohms and has a 
direct influence on AC regardless of frequency. Inductive 
reactance and capacitive reactance, on the other hand, oppose 
current flow only in AC circuits, not in DC circuits. Since 
AC constantly changes direction and intensity, inductors and 
capacitors may also create an opposition to current flow in 
AC circuits. It should also be noted that inductive reactance 
and capacitive reactance may create a phase shift between 
the voltage and current in an AC circuit. Whenever analyzing 
an AC circuit, it is very important to consider the resistance, 
inductive reactance, and the capacitive reactance. All three 
have an effect on the current of that circuit. 

Resistance
As mentioned, resistance creates an opposition to current 
in an AC circuit similar to the resistance of a DC circuit. 
The current through a resistive portion of an AC circuit 
is inversely proportional to the resistance and directly 
proportional to the voltage applied to that circuit or portion 
of the circuit. The equations I = E / R & E = I × R show how 
current is related to both voltage and resistance. It should be 
noted that resistance in an AC circuit does not create a phase 
shift between voltage and current. 

Figure 9-17 shows how a circuit of 10 ohms allows 11.5 amps 
of current flow through an AC resistive circuit of 115 volts.
 

I = E
 R
 

I =  115V
   10Ω
 
 I = 11.5 amps

Inductive Reactance
When moving a magnet through a coil of wire, a voltage is 
induced across the coil. If a complete circuit is provided, then 
a current will also be induced. The amount of induced voltage 
is directly proportional to the rate of change of the magnetic 
field with respect to the coil. Conversely, current flowing 
through a coil of wire produces a magnetic field. When this 
wire is formed into a coil, it then becomes a basic inductor.

The primary effect of a coil is its property to oppose 
any change in current through it. This property is called 
inductance. When current flows through any conductor, a 
magnetic field starts to expand from the center of the wire. 
As the lines of magnetic force grow outward through the 
conductor, they induce an EMF in the conductor itself. 
The induced voltage is always in the direction opposite 
to the direction of the applied current flow. The effects 
of this countering EMF are to oppose the applied current. 
This effect is only a temporary condition. Once the current 
reaches a steady value in the conductor, the lines of magnetic 
force are no longer expanding and the countering EMF 
is no longer present. Since AC is constantly changing in 
value, the inductance repeats in a cycle always opposite the 
applied voltage. It should be noted that the unit of measure 
for inductance is the henry (H). 

The physical factors that affect inductance are:

1. Number of turns—doubling the number of turns in a 
coil produces a field twice as strong if the same current 
is used. As a general rule, the inductance varies with 
the square of the number of turns. 

2. Cross-sectional area of the coil—the inductance of a 
coil increases directly as the cross-sectional area of the 
core increases. Doubling the radius of a coil increases 
the inductance by a factor of four. 

3. Length of a coil—doubling the length of a coil, while 
keeping the same number of turns, reduces inductance 
by one-half. 


9-13

110V AC 60 Hz

L = 0.146 H

A

AC power supply

XL1 = 10Ω

XL2 = 15Ω

Figure 9-18. AC circuit containing inductance. 

Figure 9-19. Inductances in series.

4. Core material around which the coil is formed— 
coils are wound on either magnetic or nonmagnetic 
materials. Some nonmagnetic materials include 
air, copper, plastic, and glass. Magnetic materials 
include nickel, iron, steel, and cobalt, which have 
a permeability that provides a better path for the 
magnetic lines of force and permit a stronger  
magnetic field. 

Since AC is in a constant state of change, the magnetic fields 
within an inductor are also continuously changing and create 
an inducted voltage/current. This induced voltage opposes 
the applied voltage and is known as the counter EMF. This 
opposition is called inductive reactance, symbolized by XL, 
and is measured in ohms. This characteristic of the inductor 
may also create a phase shift between voltage and current 
of the circuit. The phase shift created by inductive reactance 
always causes voltage to lead current. That is, the voltage of 
an inductive circuit reaches its peak values before the current 
reaches peak values. Additional discussions related to phase 
shift are presented later in this chapter. 

Inductance is the property of a circuit to oppose any change 
in current and is measured in henries. Inductive reactance is 
a measure of how much the countering EMF in the circuit 
opposes the applied current. The inductive reactance of 
a component is directly proportional to the inductance of 
the component and the applied frequency to the circuit. By 
increasing either the inductance or applied frequency, the 
inductive reactance likewise increases and presents more 
opposition to current in the circuit. This relationship is given 
as XL = 2πfL Where XL = inductive reactance in ohms, L 
= inductance in henries, f = frequency in cycles per second, 
and π = 3.1416

In Figure 9-18, an AC series circuit is shown in which the 
inductance is 0.146 henry and the voltage is 110 volts at a 
frequency of 60 cycles per second. Inductive reactance is 
determined by the following method. 

XL = 2π × f × L

XL = 6.28 × 60 × 0.146

XL = 55Ω

In AC series circuits, inductive reactance is added like 
resistances in series in a DC circuit. [Figure 9-19] The total 
reactance in the illustrated circuit equals the sum of the 
individual reactances. 

XL = XL1 + XL2

XL =10Ω + 15Ω

XLT = 25Ω

The total reactance of inductors connected in parallel is 
found the same way as the total resistance in a parallel 
circuit. [Figure 9-20] Thus, the total reactance of inductances 
connected in parallel, as shown, is expressed as:

XLT  =
    1

    1     +     1     +     1
  XL1 XL2 XL3

XLT  =
    1

    1     +     1     +     1
   15  15  15

XLT  = 5Ω


9-14

AC 
power 
supply

XL1 = 15 Ω XL2 = 15 Ω XL3 = 15 Ω

Dielectric
X

Y

80 µF Capacitor
AC generator
110V@400cps

Figure 9-20. Inductances in parallel. Figure 9-21. Capacitor in an AC circuit.

Capacitive Reactance
Capacitance is the ability of a body to hold an electric charge. 
In general, a capacitor is constructed of two parallel plates 
separated by an insulator. The insulator is commonly called 
the dielectric. The capacitor’s plates have the ability to store 
electrons when charged by a voltage source. The capacitor 
discharges when the applied voltage is no longer present and 
the capacitor is connected to a current path. In an electrical 
circuit, a capacitor serves as a reservoir or storehouse  
for electricity. 

The basic unit of capacitance is the farad and is given by the 
letter F. By definition, one farad is one coulomb of charge 
stored with one volt across the plates of the capacitor. In 
practical terms, one farad is a large amount of capacitance. 
Typically, in electronics, much smaller units are used. The two 
more common smaller units are the microfarad (μF), which is 
10-6 farad and the picofarad (pF), which is 10-12 farad.

Capacitance is a function of the physical properties of the 
capacitor: 

1. The capacitance of parallel plates is directly 
proportional to their area. A larger plate area produces 
a larger capacitance, and a smaller area produces less 
capacitance. If we double the area of the plates, there 
is room for twice as much charge.

2. The capacitance of parallel plates is inversely 
proportional to the distance between the plates. 

3. The dielectric material effects the capacitance of 
parallel plates. The dielectric constant of a vacuum is 
defined as 1, and that of air is very close to 1. These 
values are used as a reference, and all other materials 
have values relative to that of air (vacuum).

When an AC is applied in the circuit, the charge on the plates 
constantly changes. [Figure 9-21] This means that electricity 
must flow first from Y clockwise around to X, then from 
X counterclockwise around to Y, then from Y clockwise 
around to X, and so on. Although no current flows through 

the insulator between the plates of the capacitor, it constantly 
flows in the remainder of the circuit between X and Y. As this 
current alternates to and from the capacitor, a certain time lag 
is created. When a capacitor charges or discharges through 
a resistance, a certain amount of time is required for a full 
charge or discharge. The voltage across the capacitor does not 
change instantaneously. The rate of charging or discharging 
is determined by the time constant of the circuit. This rate of 
charge and discharge creates an opposition to current flow 
in AC circuits known as capacitive reactance. Capacitive 
reactance is symbolized by XC and is measured in ohms. 
This characteristic of a capacitor may also create a phase shift 
between voltage and current of the circuit. The phase shift 
created by capacitive reactance always causes current to lead 
voltage. That is, the current of a capacitive circuit reaches its 
peak values before the voltage reaches peak values.

Capacitive reactance is a measure of how much the capacitive 
circuit opposes the applied current flow. Capacitive reactance 
is measured in ohms. The capacitive reactance of a circuit is 
indirectly proportional to the capacitance of the circuit and 
the applied frequency to the circuit. By increasing either the 
capacitance or applied frequency, the capacitive reactance 
decreases, and vice versa. This relationship is given as:

XC =
      1

           2πfC

Where: XC = capacitive reactance in ohms, C = capacitance 
in farads, f = frequency in cycles per second, and π = 3.1416.

In Figure 9-21, a series circuit is shown in which the applied 
voltage is 110 volts at 400 cps, and the capacitance of a 
condenser is 80 mf. Find the capacitive reactance and the 
current flow. 

To find the capacitive reactance, the following equation:

XC =
      1

           2πfC


9-15

110V AC 

R = 11Ω

I = 10A

50V AC
Power supply 

R = 20Ω

Ammeter I = 5A

A

R = 20Ω

Figure 9-22. Ohm's Law applies to AC circuit only when circuit 
consists of resistance only. Impedance (Z) = Resistance (R).

Figure 9-23. Two resistance values in parallel connected to an AC 
voltage. Impedance is equal to the total resistance of the circuit.

First, the capacitance, 80 μf, is changed to farads by dividing 
80 by 1,000,000, since 1 million microfarads is equal to 1 
farad. This quotient equals 0.000080 farad. This is substituted 
in the equation:

XC =
      1

           2πfC

XC =
            1

           2π(400)(0.000080)

XC = 4.97Ω
 
Impedance 
The total opposition to current flow in an AC circuit is known 
as impedance and is represented by the letter Z. The combined 
effects of resistance, inductive reactance, and capacitive 
reactance make up impedance (the total opposition to current 
flow in an AC circuit). In order to accurately calculate 
voltage and current in AC circuits, the effect of inductance 
and capacitance along with resistance must be considered. 
Impedance is measured in ohms. 

The rules and equations for DC circuits apply to AC circuits 
only when that circuit contains resistance alone and no 
inductance or capacitance. In both series and parallel circuits, 
if an AC circuit consists of resistance only, the value of the 
impedance is the same as the resistance, and Ohm’s Law 
for an AC circuit, I = E/Z, is exactly the same as for a DC 
circuit. Figure 9-22 illustrates a series circuit containing a 
heater element with 11 ohms resistance connected across a 
110-volt source. To find how much current flows if 110 volts 
AC is applied, the following example is solved:  

I = E
 Z

I =  110V
  11Ω

I = 10 amps

If there are two resistance values in parallel connected to an 
AC voltage, as seen in Figure 9-23, impedance is equal to 
the total resistance of the circuit. Once again, the calculations 
would be handled the same as if it were a DC circuit and the 
following would apply: 

RT  =
           1

    1     +     1
   R1  R2

RT  =
           1

    1     +     1
   20  20

RT = 10Ω

Since this is a pure resistive circuit RT = Z (Resistance = 
Impedance)

ZT = RT

ZT = 10Ω

To determine the current flow in the circuit use the equation: 

I = E
 Z
 

I =  50V
  10Ω

I = 5 amps

Impedance is the total opposition to current flow in an AC 
circuit. If a circuit has inductance or capacitance, one must take 
into consideration resistance (R), inductive reactance (XL), 
and/or capacitive reactance (XC) to determine impedance (Z). 
In this case, Z does not equal RT. Resistance and reactance 
(inductive or capacitive) cannot be added directly, but they 


9-16

R
e
a
ct

a
n
ce

Resistance

Z

R

Impedance

XL − XC

110V AC
60 cycles

R = 6Ω

A

XL = 0.021 H

Figure 9-24. Impedance triangle.

Figure 9-25. A circuit containing resistance and inductance.

can be considered as two forces acting at right angles to each 
other. Thus, the relation between resistance, reactance, and 
impedance may be illustrated by a right triangle. [Figure 9-24] 
Since these quantities may be related to the sides of a right 
triangle, the formula for finding the impedance can be found 
using the Pythagorean Theorem. It states that the square of 
the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the other 
two sides. Thus, the value of any side of a right triangle can 
be found if the other two sides are known. 

In practical terms, if a series AC circuit contains resistance 
and inductance, as shown in Figure 9-25, the relation between 
the sides can be stated as:

Z2 = R2 + (XL – XC)
2

The square root of both sides of the equation gives:

Z = √ R2 + (XL – XC)2 
 
This formula can be used to determine the impedance when 
the values of inductive reactance and resistance are known. It 
can be modified to solve for impedance in circuits containing 
capacitive reactance and resistance by substituting XC in the 
formula in place of XL. In circuits containing resistance with 
both inductive and capacitive reactance, the reactances can be 
combined; but because their effects in the circuit are exactly 
opposite, they are combined by subtraction (the smaller 
number is always subtracted from the larger): 

Z = XL – XC

or 

X = XC – XL

Figure 9-25 shows example 1. Here, a series circuit 
containing a resistor and an inductor are connected to a source 
of 110 volts at 60 cycles per second. The resistive element is 
a simple measuring 6 ohms, and the inductive element is a  

coil with an inductance of 0.021 henry. What is the value of 
the impedance and the current through the circuit? 

Solution:
First, the inductive reactance of the coil is computed: 

 XL = 2π × f × L

XL = 6.28 × 60 × 0.021

XL = 8 ohms inductive reactance

Next, the total impedance is computed:

Z = √ R2 + X2L 
 
Z = √ 62 + 82
 
Z = √ 36 + 64 
 
Z = √ 100
 
Z = 10Ω

Remember when making calculations for Z always use 
inductive reactance not inductance, and use capacitive 
reactance, not capacitance.

Once impedance is found, the total current can be calculated. 

I = E
 Z

I =  110V
  10Ω

I = 11 amps

Since this circuit is resistive and inductive, there is a phase 
shift where voltage leads current.


9-17

R = 10Ω

A

C = 200 µF110V AC 60 cycles 

Figure 9-26. A circuit containing resistance and capacitance.

Example 2 is a series circuit illustrated in which a capacitor 
of 200 μf is connected in series with a 10 ohm resistor. 
[Figure 9-26] What is the value of the impedance, the current 
flow, and the voltage drop across the resistor? 

Solution:
First, the capacitance is changed from microfarads to farads. 
Since 1 million microfarads equal 1 farad, then 200 μf = 
0.000200 farads.

Next solve for capacitive reactance:

XC =  
  1

         2πfC

XC =  
        1

          2π(60)(.00020)

XC =  
     1

          0.07536

XC = 13Ω

To find the impedance,

Z = √ R2 + X2C 

 
Z = √ 102 + 132
 
Z = 16.4Ω

Since this circuit is resistive and capacitive, there is a phase 
shift where current leads voltage:

To find the current:

IT =
 E

 Z

IT =
  110V

      6.4Ω

IT = 6.7 amps

To find the voltage drop across the resistor (ER):

ER = I × R

ER = 6.7A × 10Ω

ER = 67 volts

To find the voltage drop over the capacitor (EC):

EC = I × XC

EC = 6.7A × 13Ω

EC = 86.1 volts

The sum of these two voltages does not equal the applied 
voltage, since the current leads the voltage. Use the following 
formula to find the applied voltage:

E = √ (ER)2 + (EC)2

E = √ 672 + 86.12

E = √ 4,489 + 7,413

E = √ 11,902

E = 110 volts

When the circuit contains resistance, inductance, and 
capacitance, the following equation is used to find the 
impedance.

Z = √ R2 + (XL – XC)2


9-18

4Ω

10 Ω

7 Ω110V AC 60 cycles 

110V AC 60 cycles 

ER = 88V

EL = 220V

EC = 154V

Figure 9-27. A circuit containing resistance, inductance, and 
capacitance.

Figure 9-28. Voltage drops. 

Example 3: What is the impedance of a series circuit 
consisting of a capacitor with a capacitive reactance of 7 
ohms, an inductor with an inductive reactance of 10 ohms, 
and a resistor with a resistance of 4 ohms? [Figure 9-27]

Solution:

Z = √ R2 + (XL – XC)2

Z = √ 42 + (10 – 7)2

Z = √ 25

Z = 5Ω

To find total current:

IT =
  E T 

  Z

IT =
  110V 

     5Ω

IT = 22 amps

Remember that inductive and capacitive reactances can cause 
a phase shift between voltage and current. In this example, 
inductive reactance is larger than capacitive reactance, so the 
voltage leads current. 

It should be noted that since inductive reactance, capacitive 
reactance, and resistance affect each other at right angles, 
the voltage drops of any series AC circuit should be added 
using vector addition. Figure 9-28 shows the voltage drops 
over the series AC circuit described in example 3 above. 

To calculate the individual voltage drops, simply use the 
equations:  

ER = I × R

EXL = I × XL

EXC = I × XC

To determine the total applied voltage for the circuit, each 
individual voltage drop must be added using vector addition. 

ET = √ ER2  + (EL – EC)2

ET = √ 882+ (220 – 154)2

ET = √ 882+ 662

ET = √12,100

ET = 110 volts

Parallel AC Circuits
When solving parallel AC circuits, one must also use a 
derivative of the Pythagorean Theorem. The equation for 
finding impedance in an AC circuit is as follows:

Z =        1  2 +    1    –   1   2                R               XL      XC  
To determine the total impedance of the parallel circuit shown 
in Figure 9-29, one would first determine the capacitive and 
inductive reactances. (Remember to convert microfarads  
to farads.)

 


9-19

110V AC
 400 Hz 

C = 100 µF R = 50Ω 

L = 0.02H 

Figure 9-29. Total impedance of parallel circuit.

XL = 2πFL

XL = 2π(400)(0.02)

XL = 50Ω

XC =
     1 

          2πFC

100μf = 0.0001F

XC =
             1 

          2π(400)(0.0001)

XC = 4Ω

Next, the impedance can be found:

         1Z =
       1   

2
 +   1   –   1    

2

             R          XL     XC

         1Z =
       1   

2
 +   1   –   1   

2

             50        50       4

         1Z =
 √ ( .02 )2 + ( .02 – .25 )2

         1Z =
 √.0004 + .0529

Z = 1
 .23

Z = 4.33Ω

To determine the current flow in the circuit: 

IT =
  ET

  Z

IT =
  100V

       4.33Ω

IT = 23.09 amps

To determine the current flow through each parallel path of 
the circuit, calculate IR, IL, and IC. 

IR =
  E

         R

IR =
  100V

      50Ω

IR = 2 amps

IL =
  E

        XL

IL =
 100V

        50Ω

IL = 2 amps

IC =
  E

        XC

IC =
  100V

          4Ω

IC = 25 amps

It should be noted that the total current flow of parallel 
circuits is found by using vector addition of the individual 
current flows as follows:

IT = √ I2R + (IL – IC)2

IT = √ 22 + (2 – 25)2

IT = √ 22 + 232

IT = √ 4 + 529

IT = √ 533

IT = 23 amps


9-20

R
e
a
ct

iv
e
 p

o
w

e
r

Watts

True power

Apparent power
volts x amperes

A

50V AC power supply 

Capacitor Inductor

Resistor

Ammeter I = 5A

Figure 9-30. Power relations in AC circuit.
Figure 9-31. AC load connected to a 50-volt power supply.

Power in AC Circuits
Since voltage and current determine power, there are 
similarities in the power consumed by both AC and DC 
circuits. In AC however, current is a function of both the 
resistance and the reactance of the circuit. The power 
consumed by any AC circuit is a function of the applied 
voltage and both circuit’s resistance and reactance. AC 
circuits have two distinct types of power, one created by the 
resistance of the circuit and one created by the reactance of 
the circuit. 

True Power
True power of any AC circuit is commonly referred to as 
the working power of the circuit. True power is the power 
consumed by the resistance portion of the circuit and is 
measured in watts (W). True power is symbolized by the 
letter P and is indicated by any wattmeter in the circuit. True 
power is calculated by the formula: 

P = I2 × Z

Apparent Power 
Apparent power in an AC circuit is sometimes referred to as 
the reactive power of a circuit. Apparent power is the power 
consumed by the entire circuit, including both the resistance 
and the reactance. Apparent power is symbolized by the letter 
S and is measured in volt-amps (VA). Apparent power is a 
product of the effective voltage multiplied by the effective 
current. Apparent power is calculated by the formula: 

S = I2 × Z

Power Factor 
As seen in Figure 9-30, the resistive power and the reactive 
power effect the circuit at right angles to each other. The power 
factor in an AC circuit is created by this right angle effect.

Power factor can be defined as the mathematical difference 
between true power and apparent power. Power factor (PF)

is a ratio and always a measurement between 0 and 100. The 
power factor is directly related to the phase shift of a circuit. 
The greater the phase shift of a circuit the lower the power 
factor. For example, an AC circuit that is purely inductive 
(contains reactance only and no resistance) has a phase 
shift of 90° and a power factor of 0.0. An AC circuit that is 
purely resistive (has no reactance) has a phase shift of 0 and 
a power factor of 100. Power factor is calculated by using 
the following formula: 

PF =     True Power (Watts)    × 100
           Apparent Power (VA)
 
Example of calculating PF: Figure 9-31 shows an AC load 
connected to a 50 volt power supply. The current draw of 
the circuit is 5 amps and the total resistance of the circuit is 
8 ohms. Determine the true power, the apparent power, and 
the power factor for this circuit. 

Solution:

P = I2 × R

P = 52 × 8

P = 200 Watts

S = E × I

S = 50 × 5

S = 250VA

PF =     TP    × 100
            S

PF =     200    × 100
             250

PF = 80


9-21

Figure 9-32. Lead-acid battery installation.

Figure 9-33. Valve-regulated lead-acid battery (sealed battery). 

Power factor can also be represented as a percentage. Using 
a percentage to show power factor, the circuit in the previous 
example would have a power factor of 80 percent.

It should be noted that a low power factor is undesirable. 
Circuits with a lower power factor create excess load on 
the power supply and produce inefficiency in the system. 
Aircraft AC alternators must typically operate with a power 
factor between 90 percent and 100 percent. It is therefore very 
important to carefully consider power factor when designing 
the aircraft electrical system.
 
Aircraft Batteries
Aircraft batteries are used for many functions (e.g., ground 
power, emergency power, improving DC bus stability, 
and fault clearing). Most small private aircraft use lead-
acid batteries. Most commercial and corporate aircraft use 
nickel-cadmium (NiCd) batteries. However, other lead 
acid types of batteries are becoming available, such as the 
valve-regulated lead-acid (VRLA) batteries. The battery best 
suited for a particular application depends on the relative 
importance of several characteristics, such as weight, cost, 
volume, service or shelf life, discharge rate, maintenance, 
and charging rate. Any change of battery type may be 
considered a major alteration.

Types of Batteries
Aircraft batteries are usually identified by the material used 
for the plates. The two most common types of battery used 
are lead-acid and NiCd batteries.

Lead-Acid Batteries
Dry Charged Cell Lead-Acid Batteries

Dry charged cell lead-acid batteries, also known as flooded 
or wet batteries, are assembled with electrodes (plates) that 
have been fully charged and dried. The electrolyte is added 
to the battery when it is placed in service, and battery life 
begins when the electrolyte is added. An aircraft storage 
battery consists of 6 or 12 lead-acid cells connected in series. 
The open circuit voltage of the 6 cell battery is approximately 
12 volts, and the open circuit voltage of the 12-cell battery is 
approximately 24 volts. Open circuit voltage is the voltage of 
the battery when it is not connected to a load. When flooded 
(vented) batteries are on charge, the oxygen generated at 
the positive plates escapes from the cell. Concurrently, at 
the negative plates, hydrogen is generated from water and 
escapes from the cell. The overall result is the gassing of the 
cells and water loss. Therefore, flooded cells require periodic 
water replenishment. [Figure 9-32]

Valve-Regulated Lead-Acid Batteries (VRLA)

VRLA batteries contain all electrolyte absorbed in glass-mat 
separators with no free electrolyte and are sometimes referred 
to as sealed batteries. [Figure 9-33] The electrochemical 
reactions for VRLA batteries are the same as flooded 
batteries, except for the gas recombination mechanism that 
is predominant in VRLA batteries. These types of battery 
are used in general aviation and turbine powered aircraft and 
are sometimes authorized replacements for NiCd batteries.

When VRLA batteries are on charge, oxygen combines 
chemically with the lead at the negative plates in the presence 
of H2SO4 to form lead sulfate and water. This oxygen 
recombination suppresses the generation of hydrogen at 
the negative plates. Overall, there is no water loss during 
charging. A very small quantity of water may be lost as a 
result of self-discharge reactions; however, such loss is so 
small that no provisions are made for water replenishment. 
The battery cells have a pressure relief safety valve that may 
vent if the battery is overcharged. 


9-22

Figure 9-34. NiCd battery installation. 
Figure 9-35. Thermal runaway damage.

NiCd Batteries
A NiCd battery consists of a metallic box, usually stainless 
steel, plastic-coated steel, painted steel, or titanium 
containing a number of individual cells. [Figure 9-34] These 
cells are connected in series to obtain 12 volts or 24 volts. 
The cells are connected by highly conductive nickel copper 
links. Inside the battery box, the cells are held in place by 
partitions, liners, spacers, and a cover assembly. The battery 
has a ventilation system to allow the escape of the gases 
produced during an overcharge condition and provide cooling 
during normal operation.

NiCd cells installed in an aircraft battery are typical of 
the vented cell type. The vented cells have a vent or low 
pressure release valve that releases any generated oxygen 
and hydrogen gases when overcharged or discharged rapidly. 
This also means the battery is not normally damaged by 
excessive rates of overcharge, discharge, or even negative 
charge. The cells are rechargeable and deliver a voltage of 
1.2 volts during discharge.

Aircraft that are outfitted with NiCd batteries typically 
have a fault protection system that monitors the condition 
of the battery. The battery charger is the unit that monitors 
the condition of the battery and the following conditions  
are monitored.

1. Overheat condition

2. Low temperature condition (below –40 °F)

3. Cell imbalance

4. Open circuit

5. Shorted circuit

If the battery charger finds a fault, it turns off and sends a fault 
signal to the Electrical Load Management System (ELMS).

NiCd batteries are capable of performing to its rated capacity 
when the ambient temperature of the battery is in the range 
of approximately 60–90 °F. An increase or decrease in 
temperature from this range results in reduced capacity. NiCd 
batteries have a ventilation system to control the temperature 
of the battery. A combination of high battery temperature (in 
excess of 160 °F) and overcharging can lead to a condition 
called thermal runaway. [Figure 9-35] The temperature of 
the battery has to be constantly monitored to ensure safe 
operation. Thermal runaway can result in a NiCd chemical 
fire and/or explosion of the NiCd battery under recharge by a 
constant-voltage source and is due to cyclical, ever-increasing 
temperature and charging current. One or more shorted cells 
or an existing high temperature and low charge can produce 
the following cyclical sequence of events: 

1. Excessive current, 

2. Increased temperature, 

3. Decreased cell(s) resistance, 

4. Further increased current, and 

5. Further increased temperature. 

This does not become a self-sustaining thermal-chemical 
action if the constant-voltage charging source is removed 
before the battery temperature is in excess of 160 °F.

Capacity
Capacity is measured quantitatively in ampere-hours 
delivered at a specified discharge rate to a specified cut-off 
voltage at room temperature. The cut-off voltage is 1.0 volt 
per cell. Battery available capacity depends upon several 
factors including such items as:

1. Cell design (cell geometry, plate thickness, hardware, 
and terminal design govern performance under 
specific usage conditions of temperature, discharge 
rate, etc.).


9-23

Freezing 
PointSpecific

Gravity

1.300
1.275
1.250
1.225
1.200
1.175
1.150
1.125
1.100

 °C
–70
–62
–52
–37
–26
–20
–15
–10
–08

 °F
–95
–80
–62
–35
–16
–04
+05
+13
+19

State of Charge (SOC) for Sealed
Lead-Acid Batteries at 70°

SOC 
100%
75%
50%
25%

12 volt
12.9
12.7
12.4
12.0

24 volt
25.8
25.4
24.8
24.0

Electrolyte
Temperature
 °C
+60
+55
+49
+43
+38
+33
+27
+23
+15
+10
+05
–02
–07
–13
–18
–23
–28
–35

 °F
+140
+130
+120
+110
+100
+90
+80
+70
+60
+50
+40
+30
+20
+10
    0
–10
–20
–30

Points to Subtract From or Add
to Specific Gravity Readings

12 volt
+0.024
+0.020
+0.016
+0.012
+0.008
+0.004

 0
–0.004
–0.008
–0.012
–0.016
–0.020
–0.024
–0.028
–0.032
–0.036
–0.040
–0.044

Figure 9-36. Lead-acid battery electrolyte freezing points.

Figure 9-37. Sulfuric acid temperature correction.

2. Discharge rate (high current rates yield less capacity 
than low rates).

3. Temperature (capacity and voltage levels decrease 
as battery temperature moves away from the 60 °F 
(16 °C) to 90 °F (32 °C) range toward the high and 
low extremes).

4. Charge rate (higher charge rates generally yield greater 
capacity).

Aircraft Battery Ratings by Specification
The one-hour rate is the rate of discharge a battery can endure 
for 1 hour with the battery voltage at or above 1.67 volts per 
cell, or 20 volts for a 24-volt lead-acid battery, or 10 volts for 
a 12-volt lead-acid battery. The one-hour capacity, measured 
in ampere hours (Ah), is the product of the discharge rate and 
time (in hours) to the specified end voltage. 

The emergency rate is the total essential load, measured in 
amperes, required to support the essential bus for 30 minutes. 
This is the rate of discharge a battery can endure for 30 
minutes with the battery voltage at or above 1.67 volts per 
cell, or 20 volts for a 24 volt lead-acid battery, or 10 volts 
for a 12 volt lead-acid battery.

Storing and Servicing Facilities
Separate facilities for storing and/or servicing flooded 
electrolyte lead-acid and NiCd batteries must be maintained. 
Introduction of acid electrolyte into alkaline electrolyte 
causes permanent damage to vented (flooded electrolyte) 
NiCd batteries and vice versa. However, batteries that are 
sealed can be charged and capacity checked in the same area. 
Because the electrolyte in a valve-regulated lead-acid battery 
is absorbed in the separators and porous plates, it cannot 
contaminate a NiCd battery even when they are serviced in 
the same area.

WARNING: It is extremely dangerous to store or service 
lead-acid and NiCd batteries in the same area. Introduction 
of acid electrolytes into alkaline electrolyte destroys the 
NiCd, and vice versa.

Battery Freezing
Discharged lead-acid batteries exposed to cold temperatures 
are subject to plate damage due to freezing of the electrolyte. 
To prevent freezing damage, maintain each cell’s specific 
gravity at 1.275 or, for sealed lead-acid batteries, check 
open circuit voltage. [Figure 9-36] NiCd battery electrolyte 
is not as susceptible to freezing because no appreciable 
chemical change takes place between the charged and 
discharged states. However, the electrolyte freezes at  
approximately –75 °F.
 

NOTE: Only a load check determines overall battery condition.

Temperature Correction
U.S.-manufactured lead-acid batteries are considered fully 
charged when the specific gravity reading is between 1.275 
and 1.300. A 1⁄3 discharged battery reads about 1.240 and 
a 2⁄3 discharged battery shows a specific gravity reading of 
about 1.200 when tested by a hydrometer at an electrolyte 
temperature of 80 °F. However, to determine precise specific 
gravity readings, a temperature correction should be applied 
to the hydrometer indication. [Figure 9-37] As an example, 
for a hydrometer reading of 1.260 and electrolyte temperature 
of 40 °F, the corrected specific gravity reading of the  
electrolyte is 1.244.


9-24

Battery Charging 
Operation of aircraft batteries beyond their ambient 
temperature or charging voltage limits can result in excessive 
cell temperatures leading to electrolyte boiling, rapid 
deterioration of the cells, and battery failure. The relationship 
between maximum charging voltage and the number of cells 
in the battery is also significant. This determines (for a given 
ambient temperature and state of charge) the rate at which 
energy is absorbed as heat within the battery. For lead-acid 
batteries, the voltage per cell must not exceed 2.35 volts. 
In the case of NiCd batteries, the charging voltage limit 
varies with design and construction. Values of 1.4 and 1.5 
volts per cell are generally used. In all cases, follow the 
recommendations of the battery manufacturer.

Constant Voltage Charging (CP)

The battery charging system in an airplane is of the constant 
voltage type. An engine-driven generator, capable of 
supplying the required voltage, is connected through the 
aircraft electrical system directly to the battery. A battery 
switch is incorporated in the system so that the battery may 
be disconnected when the airplane is not in operation.

The voltage of the generator is accurately controlled by means 
of a voltage regulator connected in the field circuit of the 
generator. For a 12-volt system, the voltage of the generator 
is adjusted to approximately 14.25. On 24-volt systems, 
the adjustment should be between 28 and 28.5 volts. When 
these conditions exist, the initial charging current through the 
battery is high. As the state of charge increases, the battery 
voltage also increases, causing the current to taper down. 
When the battery is fully charged, its voltage is almost equal 
to the generator voltage, and very little current flows into the 
battery. When the charging current is low, the battery may 
remain connected to the generator without damage.

When using a constant-voltage system in a battery shop, a 
voltage regulator that automatically maintains a constant 
voltage is incorporated in the system. A higher capacity 
battery (e.g., 42 Ah) has a lower resistance than a lower 
capacity battery (e.g., 33 Ah). Hence, a high-capacity battery 
draws a higher charging current than a low-capacity battery 
when both are in the same state of charge and when the 
charging voltages are equal. The constant voltage method is 
the preferred charging method for lead-acid batteries.

Constant Current Charging 

Constant current charging is the most convenient for charging 
batteries outside the airplane because several batteries 
of varying voltages may be charged at once on the same 
system. A constant current charging system usually consists 
of a rectifier to change the normal AC supply to DC. A 
transformer is used to reduce the available 110-volt or 220-

volt AC supply to the desired level before it is passed through 
the rectifier. If a constant current charging system is used, 
multiple batteries may be connected in series, provided that 
the charging current is kept at such a level that the battery 
does not overheat or gas excessively.

The constant current charging method is the preferred method 
for charging NiCd batteries. Typically, a NiCd battery is 
constant current charged at a rate of 1CA until all the cells 
have reached at least 1.55V. Another charge cycle follows at 
0.1CA, again until all cells have reached 1.55V. The charge 
is finished with an overcharge or top-up charge, typically for 
not less than 4 hours at a rate of 0.1CA. The purpose of the 
overcharge is to expel as much, if not all the gases collected 
on the electrodes, hydrogen on the anode, and oxygen on 
the cathode; some of these gases recombine to form water 
that, in turn, raises the electrolyte level to its highest level 
after which it is safe to adjust the electrolyte levels. During 
the overcharge or top-up charge, the cell voltages go beyond 
1.6V and then slowly start to drop. No cell should rise above 
1.71V (dry cell) or drop below 1.55V (gas barrier broken).

Charging is done with vent caps loosened or open. A stuck 
vent might increase the pressure in the cell. It also allows 
for refilling of water to correct levels before the end of the 
top-up charge while the charge current is still on. However, 
cells should be closed again as soon as the vents have been 
cleaned and checked since carbon dioxide dissolved from 
outside air carbonates the cells and ages the battery.

Battery Maintenance
Battery inspection and maintenance procedures vary with 
the type of chemical technology and the type of physical 
construction. Always follow the battery manufacturer’s 
approved procedures. Battery performance at any time in a 
given application depends upon the battery’s age, state of 
health, state of charge, and mechanical integrity, which you 
can determine according  to the following:

• To determine the life and age of the battery, record the 
install date of the battery on the battery. During normal 
battery maintenance, battery age must be documented 
either in the aircraft maintenance log or in the shop 
maintenance log.

• Lead-acid battery state of health may be determined 
by duration of service interval (in the case of vented 
batteries), by environmental factors (such as excessive 
heat or cold), and by observed electrolyte leakage (as 
evidenced by corrosion of wiring and connectors or 
accumulation of powdered salts). If the battery needs to 
be refilled often, with no evidence of external leakage, 
this may indicate a poor state of the battery, the battery 
charging system, or an overcharge condition.


9-25

Figure 9-38. Battery charger.

• Use a hydrometer to determine the specific gravity of 
the lead-acid battery electrolyte, which is the weight of 
the electrolyte compared to the weight of pure water. 
Take care to ensure the electrolyte is returned to the 
cell from which it was extracted. When a specific 
gravity difference of 0.050 or more exists between 
cells of a battery, the battery is approaching the end of 
its useful life and replacement should be considered. 
Electrolyte level may be adjusted by the addition of 
distilled water. Do not add electrolyte.

• Battery state of charge is determined by the cumulative 
effect of charging and discharging the battery. In 
a normal electrical charging system, the aircraft 
generator or alternator restores a battery to full charge 
during a flight of 1 hour to 90 minutes.

• Proper mechanical integrity involves the absence 
of any physical damage, as well as assurance that 
hardware is correctly installed and the battery is 
properly connected. Battery and battery compartment 
venting system tubes, nipples, and attachments, when 
required, provide a means of avoiding the potential 
buildup of explosive gases, and should be checked 
periodically to ensure that they are securely connected 
and oriented in accordance with the maintenance 
manual’s installation procedures. Always follow 
procedures approved for the specific aircraft and 
battery system to ensure that the battery system is 
capable of delivering specified performance.

Battery and Charger Characteristics
The following information is provided to acquaint the user 
with characteristics of the more common aircraft battery 
and battery charger types. [Figure 9-38] Products may 
vary from these descriptions due to different applications of 
available technology. Consult the manufacturer for specific 
performance data.

NOTE: Never connect a lead-acid battery to a charger, unless 
properly serviced.

Lead-Acid Batteries 

Lead-acid vented batteries have a two volt nominal cell 
voltage. Batteries are constructed so that individual cells 
cannot be removed. Occasional addition of water is required 
to replace water loss due to overcharging in normal service. 
Batteries that become fully discharged may not accept 
recharge. Lead-acid sealed batteries are similar in most 
respects to lead-acid vented batteries, but do not require the 
addition of water.

The lead-acid battery is economical and has extensive 
application but is heavier than an equivalent performance 
battery of another type. The battery is capable of a high rate 
of discharge and low-temperature performance. However, 
maintaining a high rate of discharge for a period of time 
usually warps the cell plates, shorting out the battery. Its 
electrolyte has a moderate specific gravity, and state of charge 
can be checked with a hydrometer.

Lead-acid batteries are usually charged by regulated DC 
voltage sources. This allows maximum accumulation of 
charge in the early part of recharging.

NiCd Batteries

NiCd vented batteries have a 1.2-volt nominal cell voltage. 
Occasional addition of distilled water is required to replace 
water loss due to overcharging in normal service. Cause 
of failure is usually shorting or weakening of a cell. After 
replacing the bad cell with a good cell, the battery’s life can 
be extended for 5 or more years. Full discharge is not harmful 
to this type of battery.

NiCd sealed batteries are similar in most respects to NiCd 
vented batteries, but do not normally require the addition of 
water. Fully discharging the battery (to zero volts) may cause 
irreversible damage to one or more cells, leading to eventual 
battery failure due to low capacity.

The state of charge of a NiCd battery cannot be determined 
by measuring the specific gravity of the potassium hydroxide 
electrolyte. The electrolyte specific gravity does not change 
with the state of charge. The only accurate way to determine 
the state of charge of a NiCd battery is by a measured 
discharge with a NiCd battery charger and following the 
manufacturer’s instructions. After the battery has been 
fully charged and allowed to stand for at least 2 hours, the 
fluid level may be adjusted, if necessary, using distilled or 
demineralized water. Because the fluid level varies with the 


9-26

state of charge, water should never be added while the battery 
is installed in the aircraft. Overfilling the battery results in 
electrolyte spewage during charging. This causes corrosive 
effects on the cell links, self-discharge of the battery, dilution 
of the electrolyte density, possible blockage of the cell vents, 
and eventual cell rupture.

Constant current battery chargers are usually provided for 
NiCd batteries because the NiCd cell voltage has a negative 
temperature coefficient. With a constant voltage charging 
source, a NiCd battery having a shorted cell might overheat 
due to excessive overcharge and undergo a thermal runaway, 
destroying the battery and creating a possible safety hazard 
to the aircraft. Pulsed-current battery chargers are sometimes 
provided for NiCd batteries.

CAUTION: It is important to use the proper charging 
procedures for batteries under test and maintenance. These 
charging regimes for reconditioning and charging cycles 
are defined by the aircraft manufacturer and should be  
closely followed.

Aircraft Battery Inspection
Aircraft battery inspection consists of the following items:

1. Inspect battery sump jar and lines for condition and 
security.

2. Inspect battery terminals and quickly disconnect plugs 
and pins for evidence of corrosion, pitting, arcing, and 
burns. Clean as required.

3. Inspect battery drain and vent lines for restriction, 
deterioration, and security.

4. Routine preflight and postflight inspection procedures 
should include observation for evidence of physical 
damage, loose connections, and electrolyte loss.

Ventilation Systems
Modern airplanes are equipped with battery ventilating 
systems. The ventilating system removes gasses and acid 
fumes from the battery in order to reduce fire hazards and 
to eliminate damage to airframe parts. Air is carried from a 
scoop outside the airplane through a vent tube to the interior 
of the battery case. After passing over the top of the battery, 
air, battery gasses, and acid fumes are carried through another 
tube to the battery sump. This sump is a glass or plastic jar 
of at least one pint capacity. In the jar is a felt pad about 1 
inch thick saturated with a 5-percent solution of bicarbonate 
of soda and water. The tube carrying fumes to the sump 
extends into the jar to within about 1⁄4 inch of the felt pad. 
An overboard discharge tube leads from the top of the sump 
jar to a point outside the airplane. The outlet for this tube is 
designed so there is negative pressure on the tube whenever 

the airplane is in flight. This helps to ensure a continuous 
flow of air across the top of the battery through the sump 
and outside the airplane. The acid fumes going into the 
sump are neutralized by the action of the soda solution, thus 
preventing corrosion of the aircraft’s metal skin or damage 
to a fabric surface.

Installation Practices

• External surface—Clean the external surface of the 
battery prior to installation in the aircraft.

• Replacing lead-acid batteries—When replacing 
lead-acid batteries with NiCd batteries, a battery 
temperature or current monitoring system must be 
installed. Neutralize the battery box or compartment 
and thoroughly flush with water and dry. A flight 
manual supplement must also be provided for the NiCd 
battery installation. Acid residue can be detrimental to 
the proper functioning of a NiCd battery, as alkaline 
is to a lead-acid battery.

• Battery venting—Battery fumes and gases may cause 
an explosive mixture or contaminated compartments 
and should be dispersed by adequate ventilation. 
Venting systems often use ram pressure to flush 
fresh air through the battery case or enclosure to a 
safe overboard discharge point. The venting system 
pressure differential should always be positive 
and remain between recommended minimum and 
maximum values. Line runs should not permit battery 
overflow fluids or condensation to be trapped and 
prevent free airflow.

• Battery sump jars—A battery sump jar installation 
may be incorporated in the venting system to dispose 
of battery electrolyte overflow. The sump jar should 
be of adequate design and the proper neutralizing 
agent used. The sump jar must be located only on the 
discharge side of the battery venting system. 

• Installing batteries—When installing batteries in an 
aircraft, exercise care to prevent inadvertent shorting 
of the battery terminals. Serious damage to the aircraft 
structure (frame, skin and other subsystems, avionics, 
wire, fuel, etc.) can be sustained by the resultant high 
discharge of electrical energy. This condition may 
normally be avoided by insulating the terminal posts 
during the installation process. Remove the grounding 
lead first for battery removal, then the positive lead. 
Connect the grounding lead of the battery last to 
minimize the risk of shorting the hot terminal of the 
battery during installation.

• Battery hold down devices—Ensure that the battery 
hold down devices are secure, but not so tight as to 


9-27

exert excessive pressure that may cause the battery to 
buckle causing internal shorting of the battery.

• Quick-disconnect type battery—If a quick-disconnect 
type of battery connector that prohibits crossing the 
battery lead is not employed, ensure that the aircraft 
wiring is connected to the proper battery terminal. 
Reverse polarity in an electrical system can seriously 
damage a battery and other electrical components. 
Ensure that the battery cable connections are tight to 
prevent arcing or a high resistance connection.

Troubleshooting
See Figure 9-39 for a troubleshooting chart.

DC Generators and Controls 
DC generators transform mechanical energy into electrical 
energy. As the name implies, DC generators produce direct 
current and are typically found on light aircraft. In many 
cases, DC generators have been replaced with DC alternators. 
Both devices produce electrical energy to power the aircraft’s 
electrical loads and charge the aircraft’s battery. Even though 
they share the same purpose, the DC alternator and DC 
generator are very different. DC generators require a control 
circuit in order to ensure the generator maintains the correct 
voltage and current for the current electrical conditions of 
the aircraft. Typically, aircraft generators maintain a nominal 
output voltage of approximately 14 volts or 28 volts.

Generators
The principles of electromagnetic induction were discussed 
earlier in this chapter. These principles show that voltage is 
induced in the armature of a generator throughout the entire 
360° rotation of the conductor. The armature is the rotating 
portion of a DC generator. As shown, the voltage being 
induced is AC. [Figure 9-40]

Since the conductor loop is constantly rotating, some means 
must be provided to connect this loop of wire to the electrical 
loads. As shown in Figure 9-41, slip rings and brushes can 
be used to transfer the electrical energy from the rotating 
loop to the stationary aircraft loads. The slip rings are 
connected to the loop and rotate; the brushes are stationary 
and allow a current path to the electrical loads. The slip 
rings are typically a copper material and the brushes are a 
soft carbon substance. 

It is important to remember that the voltage being produced 
by this basic generator is AC, and AC voltage is supplied 
to the slip rings. Since the goal is to supply DC loads, some 
means must be provided to change the AC voltage to a DC 
voltage. Generators use a modified slip ring arrangement, 
known as a commutator, to change the AC produced in 

the generator loop into a DC voltage. The action of the 
commutator allows the generator to produce a DC output.

By replacing the slip rings of the basic AC generator with 
two half cylinders (the commutator), a basic DC generator is 
obtained. In Figure 9-42, the red side of the coil is connected 
to the red segment and the amber side of the coil to the amber 
segment. The segments are insulated from each other. The 
two stationary brushes are placed on opposite sides of the 
commutator and are so mounted that each brush contacts 
each segment of the commutator as the commutator revolves 
simultaneously with the loop. The rotating parts of a DC 
generator (coil and commutator) are called an armature.

As seen in the very simple generator of Figure 9-42, as the 
loop rotates the brushes make contact with different segments 
of the commutator. In positions A, C, and E, the brushes touch 
the insulation between the brushes; when the loop is in these 
positions, no voltage is being produced. In position B, the 
positive brush touches the red side of the conductor loop. In 
position D, the positive brush touches the amber side of the 
armature conductor. This type of connection reversal changes 
the AC produced in the conductor coil into DC to power the 
aircraft. An actual DC generator is more complex, having 
several loops of wire and commutator segments. 

Because of this switching of commutator elements, the 
red brush is always in contact with the coil side moving 
downward, and the amber brush is always in contact with 
the coil side moving upward. Though the current actually 
reverses its direction in the loop in exactly the same way as 
in the AC generator, commutator action causes the current 
to flow always in the same direction through the external 
circuit or meter. 

The voltage generated by the basic DC generator in 
Figure 9-42 varies from zero to its maximum value twice 
for each revolution of the loop. This variation of DC voltage 
is called ripple and may be reduced by using more loops, or 
coils, as shown in Figure 9-43. 
 
As the number of loops is increased, the variation between 
maximum and minimum values of voltage is reduced 
[Figure 9-43], and the output voltage of the generator 
approaches a steady DC value. For each additional loop in 
the rotor, another two commutator segments is required. A 
photo of a typical DC generator commutator is shown in 
Figure 9-44.


9-28

Failure of one or more cells to rise to 
the required 1.55 volts at the end of 
charge

Negative electrode not fully charged
Cellophane separator damage

Discharge battery and recharge. If the 
cell still fails to rise to 1.55 volts or if 
the cell’s voltage rises to 1.55 volts or 
above and then drops, remove cell 
and replace.

Distortion of cell case to cover Overcharged, overdischarged, or 
overheated cell with internal short

Plugged vent cap

Overheated battery

Discharge battery and disassemble. 
Replace defective cell. Recondition 
battery.

Replace vent cap.

Check voltage regulator: treat battery 
as above, replacing battery case and 
cover and all other defective parts.

Frequent addition of water Cell out of balance

Damaged “O” ring, vent cap

Leaking cell

Charge voltage too high

Recondition battery.

Replace damaged parts.

Discharge battery and disassemble.
Replace defective cell, recondition 
battery.

Adjust voltage regulator.

Corrosion of top hardware Acid flumes or spray or other corrosive 
atmosphere

Replace parts. Battery should be kept 
clean and kept away from such 
environments.

Foreign material within the cell case Introduced into cell through addition of 
impure water or water contaminated with 
acid

Discharge battery and disassemble, 
remove cell and replace, recondition 
battery.

Trouble Probable Cause Corrective Action

Apparent loss of capacity Very common when recharging on a 
constant potential bus, as in aircraft

Usually indicates imbalance between cells 
because of difference in temperature, 
charge efficiency, self-discharge rate, etc., 
in the cells

Electrolyte level too low 
Battery not fully charged

Reconditioning will alleviate this 
condition.

Charge. Adjust electrolyte level. Check 
aircraft voltage regulator. If OK, reduce 
maintenance interval.

Complete failure to operate Defective connection in equipment circuitry 
in which battery is installed, such as broken 
lead, inoperative relay, or improper 
receptacle installation

End terminal connector loose or diengaged 
Poor intercell connections

Open circuit or dry cell

Check and correct external circuitry.

Clean and retighten hardware using 
proper torque values.

Replace defective cell.

Excessive spewage of electrolyte High charge voltage
High temperature during charge
Electrolyte level too high

Loose or damaged vent cap

Damaged cell and seal

Clean battery, charge, and adjust 
electrolyte level.

Clean battery, tighten or replace cap, 
charge and adjust electrolyte level.

Short out all cells to 0 volts, clean 
battery, replace defective cell, charge, 
and adjust electrolyte level.

Figure 9-39. Battery troubleshooting guide.


9-29

Trouble Probable Cause Corrective Action

Distortion of battery case and/or cover Explosion caused by:
    Dry cells
    Charger failure
    High charge voltage
    Plugged vent caps
    Loose intercell connectors

Discharge battery and disassemble. 
Replace damaged parts and 
recondition.

Discolored or burned end connectors 
or intercell connectors

Dirty connections
Loose connection
Improper mating of parts

Clean parts: replace if necessary. 
Retighten hardware using proper 
torque values. Check to see that parts 
are properly mated.

–
 V

o
lta

g
e

+
 V

o
lta

g
e

Maximum

Minimum
0°

Maximum

90° 270° 360°

1 cycle

180° N

S

B

A

In
d

u
ce

d
 E

M
F

1 Revolution

A EB C D

Figure 9-39. Battery troubleshooting guide (continued).

Figure 9-40. Output of an elementary generator.

Figure 9-41. Generator slip rings and loop rotate; brushes are 
stationary. 

Figure 9-42. A two-piece slip ring, or commutator, allows brushes to transfer current that flows in a single direction (DC).

Construction Features of DC Generators
The major parts, or assemblies, of a DC generator are a field 
frame, a rotating armature, and a brush assembly. The parts 
of a typical aircraft generator are shown in Figure 9-45.

Field Frame

The frame has two functions: to hold the windings needed to 
produce a magnetic field, and to act as a mechanical support 
for the other parts of the generator. The actual electromagnet 
conductor is wrapped around pieces of laminated metal called 
field poles. The poles are typically bolted to the inside of the 

frame and laminated to reduce eddy current losses and serve  
the same purpose as the iron core of an electromagnet; they 
concentrate the lines of force produced by the field coils. 
The field coils are made up of many turns of insulated wire 
and are usually wound on a form that fits over the iron core 
of the pole to which it is securely fastened. [Figure 9-46]


9-30

A B C D E

0 1/4 1/2 3/4 1

In
d

u
ce

d
 E

M
F

Revolutions (B)

S N

Connector lugs

Field frame Drive end frame

Sealed ball bearings

Drive shaft

Field windingScrewPole shoe
Brush and holder

Steel ring

Commutator

Brush connector bars

Air scoop

Armature

Drive end

Field frame

Commutator
end frame

Figure 9-43. Increasing the number of coils reduces the ripple in 
the voltage.

Figure 9-44. Typical DC generator commutator.

Figure 9-45. Typical 24-volt aircraft generator.

A DC current is fed to the field coils to produce an 
electromagnetic field. This current is typically obtained 
from an external source that provides voltage and current 
regulation for the generator system. Generator control 
systems are discussed later in this chapter. 

Armature

The armature assembly of a generator consists of two primary 
elements: the wire coils (called windings) wound around 
an iron core and the commutator assembly. The armature 
windings are evenly spaced around the armature and mounted 
on a steel shaft. The armature rotates inside the magnetic field 
produced by the field coils. The core of the armature acts as 
an iron conductor in the magnetic field and, for this reason, 
is laminated to prevent the circulation of eddy currents. A 
typical armature assembly is shown in Figure 9-47.


9-31

Commutator

Coils

Shaft

Mica V-ring

Front V-ring

Commutator bar

Mica

Iron shell

Back V-ring with mica inner and outer rings for insulationSlots

Tightening nut

Iron ring

Commutator bars

Mica insulation between bars

Figure 9-46. Generator field frame. Figure 9-47. A drum-type armature. 

Figure 9-48. Commutator with portion removed to show construction.

Commutators

Figure 9-48 shows a cross-sectional view of a typical 
commutator. The commutator is located at the end of an 
armature and consists of copper segments divided by a thin 
insulator. The insulator is often made from the mineral mica. 
The brushes ride on the surface of the commutator forming the 
electrical contact between the armature coils and the external 
circuit. A flexible, braided copper conductor, commonly 
called a pigtail, connects each brush to the external circuit. The 
brushes are free to slide up and down in their holders in order 
to follow any irregularities in the surface of the commutator. 
The constant making and breaking of electrical connections 

between the brushes and the commutator segments, along with 
the friction between the commutator and the brush, causes 
brushes to wear out and need regular attention or replacement. 
For these reasons, the material commonly used for brushes is 
high-grade carbon. The carbon must be soft enough to prevent 
undue wear of the commutator and yet hard enough to provide 
reasonable brush life. Since the contact resistance of carbon is 
fairly high, the brush must be quite large to provide a current 
path for the armature windings.

The commutator surface is highly polished to reduce friction 
as much as possible. Oil or grease must never be used on a  


9-32

NS
+

−

Field rheostat

F
ie

ld
 w

in
d

in
g

Load

A

B

NS
+

−

Field
rheostat

Field
winding

Load

Shunt circuit Main circuit

Armature winding

ArmatureField coils

Figure 9-49. Diagram of a series wound generator. 

Figure 9-50. Shunt wound generator. 

commutator, and extreme care must be used when cleaning 
it to avoid marring or scratching the surface. 

Types of DC Generators
There are three types of DC generators: series wound, 
parallel (shunt) wound, and series-parallel (or compound 
wound). The appropriate generator is determined by the 
connections to the armature and field circuits with respect to 
the external circuit. The external circuit is the electrical load 
powered by the generator. In general, the external circuit is 
used for charging the aircraft battery and supplying power to 
all electrical equipment being used by the aircraft. As their 
names imply, windings in series have characteristics different 
from windings in parallel. 

Series Wound DC Generators

The series generator contains a field winding connected 
in series with the external circuit. [Figure 9-49] Series 
generators have very poor voltage regulation under changing 
load, since the greater the current is through the field coils 
to the external circuit, the greater the induced EMFs and the 
greater the output voltage is. When the aircraft electrical 
load is increased, the voltage increases; when the load is 
decreased, the voltage decreases. 

Since the series wound generator has such poor voltage 
and current regulation, it is never employed as an airplane 
generator. Generators in airplanes have field windings, that 
are connected either in shunt or in compound formats.

Parallel (Shunt) Wound DC Generators

A generator having a field winding connected in parallel with 
the external circuit is called a shunt generator. [Figure 9-50] 
It should be noted that, in electrical terms, shunt means  

parallel. Therefore, this type of generator could be called 
either a shunt generator or a parallel generator.

In a shunt generator, any increase in load causes a decrease 
in the output voltage, and any decrease in load causes an 
increase output voltage. This occurs since the field winding 
is connected in parallel to the load and armature, and all the 
current flowing in the external circuit passes only through 
the armature winding (not the field). 

As shown in Figure 9-50A, the output voltage of a shunt 
generator can be controlled by means of a rheostat inserted 
in series with the field windings. As the resistance of the field 
circuit is increased, the field current is reduced; consequently, 
the generated voltage is also reduced. As the field resistance 
is decreased, the field current increases and the generator 
output increases. In the actual aircraft, the field rheostat 
would be replaced with an automatic control device, such 
as a voltage regulator. 

Compound Wound DC Generators

A compound wound generator employs two field windings one 
in series and another in parallel with the load. [Figure 9-51]
This arrangement takes advantage of both the series and 


9-33

A

B

NS
+

−

Series
field
winding

Parallel
field
winding

Load
Armature winding

Series field coil

To load

Armature

Shunt
field
coil

Compound wound

Figure 9-51. Compound wound generator. 

Figure 9-52. Wear areas of commutator and brushes.

parallel characteristics described earlier. The output of a 
compound wound generator is relatively constant, even with 
changes in the load.

Generator Ratings
A DC generator is typically rated for its voltage and power 
output. Each generator is designed to operate at a specified 
voltage, approximately 14 or 28 volts. It should be noted that 
aircraft electrical systems are designed to operate at one of 
these two voltage values. The aircraft’s voltage depends on 
which battery is selected for that aircraft. Batteries are either 
12 or 24 volts when fully charged. The generator selected 
must have a voltage output slightly higher than the battery 
voltage. Hence, the 14-or 28-volt rating is required for aircraft 
DC generators.

The power output of any generator is given as the maximum 
number of amperes the generator can safely supply. Generator 
rating and performance data are stamped on the nameplate 
attached to the generator. When replacing a generator, it is 
important to choose one of the proper ratings. 

The rotation of generators is termed either clockwise or 
counterclockwise, as viewed from the driven end. The 
direction of rotation may also be stamped on the data plate. It 
is important that a generator with the correct rotation be used; 

otherwise, the polarity of the output voltage is reversed. The 
speed of an aircraft engine varies from idle rpm to takeoff 
rpm; however, during the major portion of a flight, it is at a 
constant cruising speed. The generator drive is usually geared 
to turn the generator between 11⁄8 and 11⁄2 times the engine 
crankshaft speed. Most aircraft generators have a speed at 
which they begin to produce their normal voltage. Called the 
“coming in” speed, it is usually about 1,500 rpm. 

DC Generator Maintenance
The following information about the inspection and 
maintenance of DC generator systems is general in nature 
because of the large number of differing aircraft generator 
systems. These procedures are for familiarization only. 
Always follow the applicable manufacturer’s instructions 
for a given generator system. In general, the inspection of 
the generator installed in the aircraft should include the 
following items: 

1. Security of generator mounting.

2. Condition of electrical connections.

3. Dirt and oil in the generator. If oil is present, check 
engine oil seals. Blow out any dirt with compressed air.

4. Condition of generator brushes.

5. Generator operation.

6. Voltage regulator operation.

Sparking of brushes quickly reduces the effective brush area 
in contact with the commutator bars. The degree of such 
sparking should be determined. Excessive wear warrants 
a detailed inspection and possible replacement of various 
components. [Figure 9-52]

Manufacturers usually recommend the following procedures 
to seat brushes that do not make good contact with slip 
rings or commutators. Lift the brush sufficiently to permit 


9-34

Unseated brush

000 sandpaper (sand side next to brush)

Properly seated brush

1/32" to 1/16"

Generator control

Load

Shunt field+

−

B

Figure 9-53. Seating brushes with sandpaper. Figure 9-54. Regulation of generator voltage by field rheostat.

the insertion of a strip of extra-fine 000 (triple aught) grit, 
or finer, sandpaper under the brush, rough side towards the 
carbon brush. [Figure 9-53]

Pull the sandpaper in the direction of armature rotation, being 
careful to keep the ends of the sandpaper as close to the slip 
ring or commutator surface as possible in order to avoid 
rounding the edges of the brush. When pulling the sandpaper 
back to the starting point, raise the brush so it does not ride 
on the sandpaper. Sand the brush only in the direction of 
rotation. Carbon dust resulting from brush sanding should 
be thoroughly cleaned from all parts of the generators after 
a sanding operation.

After the generator has run for a short period, brushes should 
be inspected to make sure that pieces of sand have not become 
embedded in the brush. Under no circumstances should 
emery cloth or similar abrasives be used for seating brushes 
(or smoothing commutators), since they contain conductive 
materials that cause arcing between brushes and commutator 
bars. It is important that the brush spring pressure be correct. 
Excessive pressure causes rapid wear of brushes. Too little 
pressure, however, allows bouncing of the brushes, resulting 
in burned and pitted surfaces. The pressure recommended by 
the manufacturer should be checked by the use of a spring 
scale graduated in ounces. Brush spring tension on some 
generators can be adjusted. A spring scale is used to measure 
the pressure that a brush exerts on the commutator. 

Flexible low-resistance pigtails are provided on most heavy 
current carrying brushes, and their connections should be 
securely made and checked at frequent intervals. The pigtails 
should never be permitted to alter or restrict the free motion of 
the brush. The purpose of the pigtail is to conduct the current 
from the armature, through the brushes, to the external circuit 
of the generator. 

Generator Controls
Theory of Generator Control
All aircraft are designed to operate within a specific voltage 
range (for example 13.5–14.5 volts). And since aircraft 
operate at a variety of engine speeds (remember, the engine 
drives the generator) and with a variety of electrical demands, 
all generators must be regulated by some control system. The 
generator control system is designed to keep the generator 
output within limits for all flight variables. Generator 
control systems are often referred to as voltage regulators 
or generator control units (GCU). 

Aircraft generator output can easily be adjusted through 
control of the generator’s magnetic field strength. Remember, 
the strength of the magnetic field has a direct effect on 
generator output. More field current means more generator 
output and vice versa. Figure 9-54 shows a simple generator 
control used to adjust field current. When field current is 
controlled, generator output is controlled. Keep in mind, this 
system is manually adjusted and would not be suitable for 
aircraft. Aircraft systems must be automatic and are therefore 
a bit more complex.

There are two basic types of generator controls: 
electro-mechanical and solid-state (transistorized). The 
electromechanical type controls are found on older aircraft 
and tend to require regular inspection and maintenance. 
Solid-state systems are more modern and typically 
considered to have better reliability and more accurate 
generator output control. 


9-35

LOAD

Armature

Series field

Parallel 
(shunt) field

Figure 9-55. Starter-generator.

Functions of Generator Control Systems
Most generator control systems perform a number of 
functions related to the regulation, sensing, and protection 
of the DC generation system. Light aircraft typically 
require a less complex generator control system than larger 
multiengine aircraft. Some of the functions listed below are 
not found on light aircraft. 

Voltage Regulation

The most basic of the GCU functions is that of voltage 
regulation. Regulation of any kind requires the regulation 
unit to take a sample of a generator output and compare 
that sample to a known reference. If the generator’s output 
voltage falls outside of the set limits, then the regulation unit 
must provide an adjustment to the generator field current. 
Adjusting field current controls generator output. 

Overvoltage Protection

The overvoltage protection system compares the sampled 
voltage to a reference voltage. The overvoltage protection 
circuit is used to open the relay that controls the field 
excitation current. It is typically found on more complex 
generator control systems.

Parallel Generator Operations

On multiengine aircraft, a paralleling feature must be 
employed to ensure all generators operate within limits. In 
general, paralleling systems compare the voltages between 
two or more generators and adjust the voltage regulation 
circuit accordingly. 

Overexcitation Protection

When one generator in a paralleled system fails, one of the 
generators can become overexcited and tends to carry more 
than its share of the load, if not all of the loads. Basically, 
this condition causes the generator to produce too much 
current. If this condition is sensed, the overexcited generator 
must be brought back within limits, or damage occurs. The 
overexcitation circuit often works in conjunction with the 
overvoltage circuit to control the generator. 

Differential Voltage

This function of a control system is designed to ensure all 
generator voltage values are within a close tolerance before 
being connected to the load bus. If the output is not within 
the specified tolerance, then the generator contactor is not 
allowed to connect the generator to the load bus. 

Reverse Current Sensing

If the generator cannot maintain the required voltage level, 
it eventually begins to draw current instead of providing it. 
This situation occurs, for example, if a generator fails. When 

a generator fails, it becomes a load to the other operating 
generators or the battery. The defective generator must be 
removed from the bus. The reverse current sensing function 
monitors the system for a reverse current. Reverse current 
indicates that current is flowing to the generator not from 
the generator. If this occurs, the system opens the generator 
relay and disconnects the generator from the bus. 

Generator Controls for High Output Generators
Most modern high output generators are found on turbine-
powered corporate-type aircraft. These small business 
jets and turboprop aircraft employ a generator and starter 
combined into one unit. This unit is referred to as a starter-
generator. A starter-generator has the advantage of combining 
two units into one housing, saving space and weight. Since 
the starter-generator performs two tasks, engine starting and 
generation of electrical power, the control system for this unit 
is relatively complex. 

A simple explanation of a starter-generator shows that the 
unit contains two sets of field windings. One field is used to 
start the engine and one used for the generation of electrical 
power. [Figure 9-55]

During the start function, the GCU must energize the series 
field and the armature causes the unit to act like a motor. 
During the generating mode, the GCU must disconnect 
the series field, energize the parallel field, and control the 
current produced by the armature. At this time, the starter-
generator acts like a typical generator. Of course, the GCU 
must perform all the functions described earlier to control 
voltage and protect the system. These functions include 
voltage regulation, reverse current sensing, differential 
voltage, overexcitation protection, overvoltage protection, 
and parallel generator operations. A typical GCU is shown 
in Figure 9-56.


9-36

Armature

Generator
controlField circuit

Generator output to electrical loads

Field winding

Armature

Carbon stack
Field

Voltage coil

Figure 9-56. Generator control unit (GCU). 

Figure 9-57. Voltage regulator for low-output generator.

Figure 9-58. Carbon pile regulator.

In general, modern GCUs for high-output generators employ 
solid-state electronic circuits to sense the operations of the 
generator or starter-generator. The circuitry then controls a 
series of relays and/or solenoids to connect and disconnect the 
unit to various distribution buses. One unit found in almost 
all voltage regulation circuitry is the zener diode. The zener 
diode is a voltage sensitive device that is used to monitor 
system voltage. The zener diode, connected in conjunction 
to the GCU circuitry, then controls the field current, which 
in turn controls the generator output. 

Generator Controls for Low-Output Generators
A typical generator control circuit for low-output generators 
modifies current flow to the generator field to control 
generator output power. As flight variables and electrical 
loads change, the GCU must monitor the electrical system and 
make the appropriate adjustments to ensure proper system 
voltage and current. The typical generator control is referred 
to as a voltage regulator or a GCU. 

Since most low-output generators are found on older aircraft, 
the control systems for these systems are electromechanical 
devices. (Solid-state units are found on more modern aircraft 
that employ DC alternators and not DC generators.) The 
two most common types of voltage regulator are the carbon 

pile regulator and the three-unit regulator. Each of these 
units controls field current using a type of variable resistor. 
Controlling field current then controls generator output. A 
simplified generator control circuit is shown in Figure 9-57.
 
Carbon Pile Regulators

The carbon pile regulator controls DC generator output by 
sending the field current through a stack of carbon disks 
(the carbon pile). The carbon disks are in series with the 
generator field. If the resistance of the disks increases, 
the field current decreases and the generator output goes 
down. If the resistance of the disks decreases, the field 
current increases and generator output goes up. As seen 
in Figure 9-58, a voltage coil is installed in parallel with 
the generator output leads. The voltage coil acts like an 
electromagnet that increases or decrease strength as generator 
output voltage changes. The magnetism of the voltage coil 
controls the pressure on the carbon stack. The pressure on 
the carbon stack controls the resistance of the carbon; the 
resistance of the carbon controls field current and the field 
current controls generator output. 

Carbon pile regulators require regular maintenance to ensure 
accurate voltage regulation; therefore, most have been 
replaced on aircraft with more modern systems. 


9-37

DC generator Voltage regulator

Armature

Resistance

To electrical loads

Contact points

Voltage coil

Field currentField circuit

DC generator Current limiter

Armature

To electrical loads

Contact
points (NC)Current

coil

Field circuit

Figure 9-59. The three relays found on this regulator are used to 
regulate voltage, limit current, and prevent reverse current flow.

Figure 9-60. Voltage regulator. 

Figure 9-61. Current limiter.

Three-Unit Regulators 

The three-unit regulator used with DC generator systems is 
made of three distinct units. Each of these units performs 
a specific function vital to correct electrical system 
operation. A typical three-unit regulator consists of three 
relays mounted in a single housing. Each of the three relays 
monitors generator outputs and opens or closes the relay 
contact points according to system needs. A typical three-
unit regulator is shown in Figure 9-59.

Voltage Regulator

The voltage regulator section of the three-unit regulator 
is used to control generator output voltage. The voltage 
regulator monitors generator output and controls the 
generator field current as needed. If the regulator senses 
that system voltage is too high, the relay points open and the 
current in the field circuit must travel through a resistor. This 
resistor lowers field current and therefore lowers generator 
output. Remember, generator output goes down whenever 
generator field current goes down. 

As seen in Figure 9-60, the voltage coil is connected in parallel 
with the generator output, and it therefore measures the 
voltage of the system. If voltage gets beyond a predetermined 
limit, the voltage coil becomes a strong magnet and opens the 
contact points. If the contact points are open, field current 
must travel through a resistor and therefore field current goes 
down. The dotted arrow shows the current flow through the 
voltage regulator when the relay points are open.

Since this voltage regulator has only two positions (points 
open and points closed), the unit must constantly be in 
adjustment to maintain accurate voltage control. During 
normal system operation, the points are opening and closing 
at regular intervals. The points are in effect vibrating. This 
type of regulator is sometimes referred to as a vibrating-
type regulator. As the points vibrate, the field current raises 
and lowers and the field magnetism averages to a level that  

maintains the correct generator output voltage. If the system 
requires more generator output, the points remain closed 
longer and vice versa. 

Current Limiter

The current limiter section of the three-unit regulator is 
designed to limit generator output current. This unit contains 
a relay with a coil wired in series with respect to the generator 
output. As seen in Figure 9-61, all the generator output 
current must travel through the current coil of the relay. This 
creates a relay that is sensitive to the current output of the 
generator. That is, if generator output current increases, the 
relay points open and vice versa. The dotted line shows the 
current flow to the generator field when the current limiter 
points are open. It should be noted that, unlike the voltage 
regulator relay, the current limiter is typically closed during 
normal flight. Only during extreme current loads must the 
current limiter points open; at that time, field current is 
lowered and generator output is kept within limits. 


9-38

DC generator Reverse-current relay

Armature
Voltage

regulator 
and current 

limiter

To electrical loads

Current coil

Voltage coil

Contact points (N.O.)

DC generator

Three-unit regulator

Current limiterVoltage regulator

+

−

Armature

A

Reverse current relay

Figure 9-62. Reverse-current relay.

Figure 9-63. Three-unit regulator for variable speed generators.

Reverse-Current Relay

The third unit of a three-unit regulator is used to prevent 
current from leaving the battery and feeding the generator. 
This type of current flow would discharge the battery and is 
opposite of normal operation. It can be thought of as a reverse 
current situation and is known as reverse-current relay. The 
simple reverse-current relay shown in Figure 9-62 contains 
both a voltage coil and a current coil.

The voltage coil is wired in parallel to the generator output 
and is energized any time the generator output reaches its 
operational voltage. As the voltage coil is energized, the 
contact points close and the current is then allowed to flow 
to the aircraft electrical loads, as shown by the dotted lines. 
The diagram shows the reverse current relay in its normal 

operating position; the points are closed and current is 
flowing from the generator to the aircraft electrical loads. 
As current flows to the loads, the current coil is energized 
and the points remain closed. If there is no generator output 
due to a system failure, the contact points open because 
magnetism in the relay is lost. With the contact points open, 
the generator is automatically disconnected from the aircraft 
electrical system, which prevents reverse flow from the load 
bus to the generator. A typical three-unit regulator for aircraft 
generators is shown in Figure 9-63. 

As seen in Figure 9-63, all three units of the regulator work 
together to control generator output. The regulator monitors 
generator output and controls power to the aircraft loads as 
needed for flight variables. Note that the vibrating regulator 
just described was simplified for explanation purposes. 
A typical vibrating regulator found on an aircraft would 
probably be more complex.

DC Alternators and Controls
DC alternators (like generators) change mechanical energy 
into electrical energy by the process of electromagnetic 
induction. In general, DC alternators are lighter and more 
efficient than DC generators. DC alternators and their related 
controls are found on modern, light, piston-engine aircraft. 
The alternator is mounted in the engine compartment driven 
by a v-belt, or drive gear mechanism, which receives power 
from the aircraft engine. [Figure 9-64] The control system 
of a DC alternator is used to automatically regulate alternator 
output power and ensure the correct system voltage for 
various flight parameters.


9-39

To electrical load
+−

Rectifier assembly
Armature
winding

Field

A B C

90° 180° 270° 360°

120° 120° 120°
Phase C

Phase A

Phase B

One full rotation of the AC alternator

Phase 1

Phase 2

Phase 3

1 2 3

Time Resultant DC waveform

Figure 9-64. DC alternator installation.

Figure 9-65. Diagram of a typical alternator.

Figure 9-66. Sine waves.

Figure 9-67. Three-phase armature windings: Y on the left and 
delta winding on the right.

Figure 9-68. Relatively smooth ripple DC. 

DC Alternators 
DC alternators contain two major components: the armature 
winding and the field winding. The field winding (which 
produces a magnetic field) rotates inside the armature and, 
using the process of electromagnetic induction, the armature 
produces a voltage. This voltage produced by the armature 
is fed to the aircraft electrical bus and produces a current to 
power the electrical loads. Figure 9-65 shows a basic diagram 
of a typical alternator. 

The armature used in DC alternators actually contains three 
coils of wire. Each coil receives current as the magnetic 
field rotates inside the armature. The resulting output 
voltage consists of three distinct AC sine waves, as shown 
in Figure 9-66. The armature winding is known as a three- 
phase armature, named after the three different voltage 
waveforms produced. 

Figure 9-67 shows the two common methods used to connect 
the three phase armature windings: the delta winding and 
the Y winding. For all practical purposes, the two windings 
produce the same results in aircraft DC alternators. 

Since the three-phase voltage produced by the alternators 
armature is AC, it is not compatible with typical DC electrical 
loads and must be rectified (changed to DC). Therefore, the 
armature output current is sent through a rectifier assembly that 
changes the three-phase AC to DC. [Figure 9-67] Each phase 
of the three-phase armature overlaps when rectified, and the 
output becomes a relatively smooth ripple DC. [Figure 9-68]

The invention of the diode has made the development of the 
alternator possible. The rectifier assembly is comprised of 
six diodes. This rectifier assembly replaces the commutator 
and brushes found on DC generators and helps to make the 
alternator more efficient. Figure 9-69 shows the inside of a 
typical alternator; the armature assembly is located on the 
outer edges of the alternator and the diodes are mounted to 
the case.


9-40

Armature

Diode

Field winding

Slip rings

Figure 9-69. Diode assembly. 

Figure 9-70. Alternator field winding. 

Figure 9-71. Alternator brushes.

The field winding, shown in Figure 9-70, is mounted to a 
rotor shaft so it can spin inside of the armature assembly.

The field winding must receive current from an aircraft 
battery in order to produce an electromagnet. Since the field 
rotates, a set of brushes must be used to send power to the 
rotating field. Two slip rings are mounted to the rotor and 
connect the field winding to electrical contacts called brushes. 
Since the brushes carry relatively low current, the brushes 
of an alternator are typically smaller than those found inside 
a DC generator. [Figure 9-71] DC alternator brushes last 
longer and require less maintenance than those found in a 
DC generator.

The alternator case holds the alternator components inside 
a compact housing that mounts to the engine. Aircraft 
alternators either produce a nominal 14-volt output or 
a 26-volt output. The physical size of the alternator is 
typically a function of the alternator’s amperage output. 
Common alternators for light aircraft range in output form  
60–120 amps. 

Alternator Voltage Regulators 
Voltage regulators for DC alternators are similar to those 
found on DC generators. The general concepts are the same 
in that adjusting alternator field current controls alternator 
output. Regulators for most DC alternators are either the 
vibrating-relay type or solid-state regulators, which are found 
on most modern aircraft. Vibrating-relay regulators are similar 
to those discussed in the section on generator regulators. As 
the points of the relay open, the field current is lowered and 
alternator output is lowered and vice versa. 

Solid-State Regulators
Solid-state regulators for modern light aircraft are often 
referred to as alternator control units (ACUs). These units 
contain no moving parts and are generally considered 
to be more reliable and provide better system regulation 
than vibrating-type regulators. Solid-state regulators rely 
on transistor circuitry to control alternator field current 
and alternator output. The regulator monitors alternator 
output voltage/current and controls alternator field current 
accordingly. Solid-state regulators typically provide 
additional protection circuitry not found in vibrating-type 
regulators. Protection may include over- or under-voltage 
protection, overcurrent protection, as well as monitoring the 
alternator for internal defects, such as a defective diode. In 
many cases, the ACU also provides a warning indication to 
the pilot if a system malfunction occurs. 

A key component of any solid-state voltage regulator is known 
as the zener diode. Figure 9-72 shows the schematic diagram 
symbol of a zener diode, as well as one installed in an ACU. 

The operation of a zener diode is similar to a common diode 
in that the zener only permits current flow in one direction. 
This is true until the voltage applied to the zener reaches a 
certain level. At that predetermined voltage level, the zener 
then permits current flow with either polarity. This is known 
as the breakdown or zener voltage. 


9-41

CathodeAnode

Zener
Diode

Transistor

Alternator
output

Alternator
field

Ground

Figure 9-72. Zener diode. 

Figure 9-73. ACU circuitry.
Figure 9-74. Inverter.

As an ACU monitors alternator output, the zener diode is 
connected to system voltage. When the alternator output 
reaches the specific zener voltage, the diode controls a 
transistor in the circuit, which in turn controls the alternator 
field current. This is a simplified explanation of the complete 
circuitry of an ACU. [Figure 9-73] However, it is easy to see 
how the zener diode and transistor circuit are used in place 
of an electromechanical relay in a vibrating-type regulator. 
The use of solid-state components creates a more accurate 
regulator that requires very little maintenance. The solid- 
state ACU is, therefore, the control unit of choice for modern 
aircraft with DC alternators. 

Power Systems
Since certain electrical systems operate only on AC, many 
aircraft employ a completely AC electrical system, as well 
as a DC system. The typical AC system would include 
an AC alternator (generator), a regulating system for that 
alternator, AC power distribution buses, and related fuses and 
wiring. Note that when referring to AC systems, the terms 
“alternator” and “generator” are often used interchangeably. 
This chapter uses the term “AC alternator.” 

AC power systems are becoming more popular on modern 
aircraft. Light aircraft tend to operate most electrical systems 
using DC, therefore the DC battery can easily act as a backup 
power source. Some modern light aircraft also employ a small 
AC system. In this case, the light aircraft probably uses an 
AC inverter to produce the AC needed for this system. 

Inverters are commonly used when only a small amount of 
AC is required for certain systems. Inverters may also be 
used as a backup AC power source on aircraft that employ 
an AC alternator. Figure 9-74 shows a typical inverter that 
might be found on modern aircraft. 

A modern inverter is a solid-state device that converts 
DC power into AC power. The electronic circuitry within 
an inverter is quite complex; however, for an aircraft 
technician’s purposes, the inverter is simply a device that 
uses DC power, then feeds power to an AC distribution bus. 
Many inverters supply both 26-volt AC, as well as 115-volt 
AC. The aircraft can be designed to use either voltage or both 
simultaneously. If both voltages are used, the power must be 
distributed on separate 26-and 115-volt AC buses. 

AC Alternators   
AC alternators are found only on aircraft that use a large 
amount of electrical power. Virtually all transport category 
aircraft, such as the Boeing 757 or the Airbus A-380, employ 
one AC alternator driven by each engine. These aircraft 
also have an auxiliary AC alternator driven by the auxiliary 
power unit. In most cases, transport category aircraft also 
have at least one more AC backup power source, such as 
an AC inverter or a small AC alternator driven by a ram-air 
turbine (RAT). 


9-42

A B C

90° 180° 270° 360°

120° 120° 120°
Phase C

Phase A

Phase B

One full rotation of the AC alternator

Figure 9-75. AC alternator sine waves.

Figure 9-76. Large aircraft AC alternator.

AC alternators produce a three-phase AC output. For each 
revolution of the alternator, the unit produces three separate 
voltages. The sine waves for these voltages are separated 
by 120°. [Figure 9-75] This wave pattern is similar to those 
produced internally by a DC alternator; however, in this case, 
the AC alternator does not rectify the voltage and the output 
of the unit is AC. 

The modern AC alternator does not utilize brushes or slip 
rings and is often referred to as a brushless AC alternator. 
This brushless design is extremely reliable and requires 
very little maintenance. In a brushless alternator, energy to 
or from the alternator’s rotor is transferred using magnetic 
energy. In other words, energy from the stator to the rotor 
is transferred using magnetic flux energy and the process 
of electromagnetic induction. A typical large aircraft AC 
alternator is shown in Figure 9-76.

As seen in Figure 9-77, the brushless alternator actually 
contains three generators: the exciter generator (armature 
and permanent magnet field), the pilot exciter generator 
(armature and fields windings), and the main AC alternator 
(armature winding and field windings). The need for 
brushes is eliminated by using a combination of these three  
distinct generators. 

The exciter is a small AC generator with a stationary field 
made of a permanent magnet and two electromagnets. The 
exciter armature is three phase and mounted on the rotor shaft. 
The exciter armature output is rectified and sent to the pilot 
exciter field and the main generator field. 

The pilot exciter field is mounted on the rotor shaft and is 
connected in series with the main generator field. The pilot 
exciter armature is mounted on the stationary part of the 
assembly. The AC output of the pilot exciter armature is 
supplied to the generator control circuitry where it is rectified, 
regulated, and then sent to the exciter field windings. The 
current sent to the exciter field provides the voltage regulation 
for the main AC alternator. If greater AC alternator output 
is needed, there is more current sent to the exciter field and 
vice versa. 

In short, the exciter permanent magnet and armature starts the 
generation process, and the output of the exciter armature is 
rectified and sent to the pilot exciter field. The pilot exciter 
field creates a magnetic field and induces power in the 
pilot exciter armature through electromagnetic induction. 
The output of the pilot exciter armature is sent to the main 
alternator control unit and then sent back to the exciter field. 
As the rotor continues to turn, the main AC alternator field 
generates power into the main AC alternator armature, also 
using electromagnetic induction. The output of the main AC 
armature is three-phase AC and used to power the various 
electrical loads. 

Some alternators are cooled by circulating oil through the 
internal components of the alternator. The oil used for 
cooling is supplied from the constant speed drive assembly 
and often cooled by an external oil cooler assembly. Located 
in the flange connecting the generator and drive assemblies, 
ports make oil flow between the constant speed drive and 
the generator possible. This oil level is critical and typically 
checked on a routine basis. 

Alternator Drive 
The unit shown in Figure 9-78 contains an alternator assembly 
combined with an automatic drive mechanism. The automatic 
drive controls the alternator’s rotational speed which allows 
the alternator to maintain a constant 400-Hz AC output. 

All AC alternators must rotate at a specific rpm to keep 
the frequency of the AC voltage within limits. Aircraft AC 
alternators should produce a frequency of approximately 
400 Hz. If the frequency strays more than 10  percent from 
this value, the electrical systems do not operate correctly. A 
unit called a constant-speed drive (CSD) is used to ensure 
the alternator rotates at the correct speed to ensure a 400-  
Hz frequency. The CSD can be an independent unit or 


9-43

Main AC alternator
armature winding

Exciter 
electromagnet 
field

Pilot exciter
armature

3-phase 
bridge rectifier

N

S

M
ai

n
 A

C
 a

lt
er

n
at

o
r 

fi
el

d

Exciter
armature

Exciter 
permanent 
magnet field

Figure 9-77. Schematic of an AC alternator. 

mounted within the alternator housing. When the CSD and 
the alternator are contained within one unit, the assembly is 
known as an integrated drive generator (IDG). 

The CSD is a hydraulic unit similar to an automatic 
transmission found in a modern automobile. The engine of 
the automobile can change rpm while the speed of the car 
remains constant. This is the same process that occurs for an 
aircraft AC alternator. If the aircraft engine changes speed, 
the alternator speed remains constant. A typical hydraulic-
type drive is shown in Figure 9-79. This unit can be controlled 
either electrically or mechanically. Modern aircraft employ 
an electronic system. The constant-speed drive enables the 
alternator to produce the same frequency at slightly above 
engine idle rpm as it does at maximum engine rpm. 

The hydraulic transmission is mounted between the AC 
alternator and the aircraft engine. Hydraulic oil or engine oil 
is used to operate the hydraulic transmission, which creates a 
constant output speed to drive the alternator. In some cases, 
this same oil is used to cool the alternator as shown in the CSD 
cutaway view of Figure 9-79. The input drive shaft is powered 
by the aircraft engine gear case. The output drive shaft, on the 
opposite end of the transmission, engages the drive shaft of 
the alternator. The CSD employs a hydraulic pump assembly, 
a mechanical speed control, and a hydraulic drive. Engine 
rpm drives the hydraulic pump, the hydraulic drive turns the 

alternator. The speed control unit is made up of a wobble plate 
that adjusts hydraulic pressure to control output speed. 

Figure 9-80 shows a typical electrical circuit used to control 
alternator speed. The circuit controls the hydraulic assembly 
found in a typical CSD. As shown, the alternator input speed 
is monitored by a tachometer (tach) generator. The tach 
generator signal is rectified and sent to the valve assembly. 
The valve assembly contains three electromagnetic coils that 
operate the valve. The AC alternator output is sent through a 
control circuit that also feeds the hydraulic valve assembly. 
By balancing the force created by the three electromagnets, 
the valve assembly controls the flow of fluid through 
the automatic transmission and controls the speed of the  
AC alternator. 

It should be noted that an AC alternator also produces a 
constant 400 Hz if that alternator is driven directly by an 
engine that rotates at a constant speed. On many aircraft, 
the auxiliary power unit operates at a constant rpm. AC 
alternators driven by these APUs are typically driven 
directly by the engine, and there is no CSD required. For 
these units, the APU engine controls monitor the alternator 
output frequency. If the alternator output frequency varies 
from 400 Hz, the APU speed control adjusts the engine rpm 
accordingly to keep the alternator output within limits. 


9-44

FW
D

Constant-speed drive

Integrated drive generator

Terminal block

Case relief valve

Input shaft (aneroid valve inside)

Disconnect solenoid with thermal plug

Electrical connector A

Aspirator Check valve

Figure 9-78. Constant-speed drive (top) and integrated drive generator (bottom).


9-45

Constant
speed drive

Tach generator

AC alternator

To load

Speed adjustment

Tach generator rectifier

Control circuit Hydraulic
valve assembly

Figure 9-80. Speed control circuit.

Figure 9-79. A hydraulic constant speed drive for an AC alternator. 

AC Alternators Control Systems 
Modern aircraft that employ AC alternators use several 
computerized control units, typically located in the aircraft’s 
equipment bay for the regulation of AC power throughout the 
aircraft. Figure 9-81 shows a photo of a typical equipment 
bay and computerized control units.

Since AC alternators are found on large transport category 
aircraft designed to carry hundreds of passengers, their 
control systems always have redundant computers that 
provide safety in the event of a system failure. Unlike DC 
systems, AC systems must ensure that the output frequency 
of the alternator stays within limits. If the frequency of an 
alternator varies from 400 Hz, or if two or more alternators 
connected to the same bus are out of phase, damage occurs to 
the system. All AC alternator control units contain circuitry 
that regulates both voltage and frequency. These control 
units also monitor a variety of factors to detect any system  


9-46

Main AC alternator
armature winding

Exciter 
electromagnet 
field

Pilot exciter
armature

3 phase 
bridge rectifier

N

S

M
ai

n
 A

C
 a

lt
er

n
at

o
r 

fi
el

d

Exciter
armature

Exciter 
permanent 
magnet field

GCU

Figure 9-81. Line replaceable units in an equipment rack. 

Figure 9-82. Schematic GCU control of the exciter field magnetism.

failures and take protective measures to ensure the integrity 
of the electrical system. The two most common units used to 
control AC alternators are the bus power control unit (BPCU) 
and the GCU. In this case, the term “generator” is used, and 
not alternator, although the meaning is the same. 

The GCU is the main computer that controls alternator 
functions. The BPCU is the computer that controls the 
distribution of AC power to the power distribution buses 
located throughout the aircraft. There is typically one GCU 
used to monitor and control each AC alternator, and there 
can be one or more BPCUs on the aircraft. BPCUs are 
described later in this chapter; however, please note that the 
BPCU works in conjunction with the GCUs to control AC 
on modern aircraft. 

A typical GCU ensures the AC alternator maintains a 
constant voltage, typically between 115 to 120 volts. The 
GCU ensures the maximum power output of the alternator 
is never exceeded. The GCU provides fault detection and 
circuit protection in the event of an alternator failure. The 
GCU monitors AC frequency and ensures the output if the 
alternator remains 400 Hz. The basic method of voltage 
regulation is similar to that found in all alternator systems; the 
output of the alternator is controlled by changing the strength 
of a magnetic field. As shown in Figure 9-82, the GCU 
controls the exciter field magnetism within the brushless 
alternator to control alternator output voltage. The frequency 
is controlled by the CDS hydraulic unit in conjunction with 
signals monitored by the GCU. 


9-47

Figure 9-83. Light aircraft circuit breaker panel.

The GCU is also used to turn the AC alternator on or off. 
When the pilot selects the operation of an AC alternator, the 
GCU monitors the alternator’s output to ensure voltage and 
frequency are within limits. If the GCU is satisfied with the 
alternator’s output, the GCU sends a signal to an electrical 
contactor that connects the alternator to the appropriate 
AC distribution bus. The contactor, often call the generator 
breaker, is basically an electromagnetic solenoid that controls 
a set of large contact points. The large contact points are 
necessary in order to handle the large amounts of current 
produced by most AC alternators. This same contactor is 
activated in the event the GCU detects a fault in the alternator 
output; however, in this case the contactor would disconnect 
the alternator from the bus. 

Aircraft Electrical Systems
Virtually all aircraft contain some form of an electrical 
system. The most basic aircraft must produce electricity for 
operation of the engine’s ignition system. Modern aircraft 
have complex electrical systems that control almost every 
aspect of flight. In general, electrical systems can be divided 
into different categories according to the function of the 
system. Common systems include lighting, engine starting, 
and power generation. 

Small Single-Engine Aircraft
Light aircraft typically have a relatively simple electrical 
system because simple aircraft generally require less 
redundancy and less complexity than larger transport 
category aircraft. On most light aircraft, there is only one 
electrical system powered by the engine-driven alternator or 
generator. The aircraft battery is used for emergency power 
and engine starting. Electrical power is typically distributed 
through one or more common points known as an electrical 
bus (or bus bar). 

Almost all electrical circuits must be protected from faults 
that can occur in the system. Faults are commonly known 
as opens or shorts. An open circuit is an electrical fault that 
occurs when a circuit becomes disconnected. A short circuit is 
an electrical fault that occurs when one or more circuits create 
an unwanted connection. The most dangerous short circuit 
occurs when a positive wire creates an unwanted connection 
to a negative connection or ground. This is typically called 
a short to ground. 

There are two ways to protect electrical systems from faults: 
mechanically and electrically. Mechanically, wires and 
components are protected from abrasion and excess wear 
through proper installation and by adding protective covers 
and shields. Electrically, wires can be protected using circuit 
breakers and fuses. The circuit breakers protect each system 
in the event of a short circuit. It should be noted that fuses 

can be used instead of circuit breakers. Fuses are typically 
found on older aircraft. A circuit breaker panel from a light 
aircraft is shown in Figure 9-83.

Battery Circuit
The aircraft battery and battery circuit is used to supply 
power for engine starting and to provide a secondary power 
supply in the event of an alternator (or generator) failure. A 
schematic of a typical battery circuit is shown in Figure 9-84. 
This diagram shows the relationship of the starter and external 
power circuits that are discussed later in this chapter. The 
bold lines found on the diagram represent large wire (see the 
wire leaving the battery positive connection), which is used in 
the battery circuit due to the heavy current provided through 
these wires. Because batteries can supply large current flows, 
a battery is typically connected to the system through an 
electrical solenoid. At the start/end of each flight, the battery 
is connected/disconnected from the electrical distribution bus 
through the solenoid contacts. A battery master switch on the 
flight deck is used to control the solenoid.

Although they are very similar, there is often confusion 
between the terms “solenoid” and “relay.” A solenoid is 
typically used for switching high current circuits and relays 
used to control lower current circuits. To help illuminate the 
confusion, the term “contactor” is often used when describing 
a magnetically operated switch. For general purposes, an 
aircraft technician may consider the terms relay, solenoid, 
and contactor synonymous. Each of these three terms may 
be used on diagrams and schematics to describe electrical 
switches controlled by an electromagnet.
 
Here it can be seen that the battery positive wire is connected 
to the electrical bus when the battery master switch is active. 
A battery solenoid is shown in Figure 9-85. The battery 
switch is often referred to as the master switch since it turns 


9-48

MAIN BUS              15A          50A

Alternator

Ammeter

Battery

External power jack

Starter B

Master switch

Starter switch

BAT

Starter solenoid

Ammeter shunt

Master solenoid

External power relay

Figure 9-84. Schematic of typical battery circuit. 

Figure 9-85. Battery solenoid.

off or on virtually all electrical power by controlling the 
battery connection. Note how the electrical connections of 
the battery solenoid are protected from electrical shorts by 
rubber covers at the end of each wire.

The ammeter shown in the battery circuit is used to monitor 
the current flow from the battery to the distribution bus. When 
all systems are operating properly, battery current should flow 
from the main bus to the battery giving a positive indication on 
the ammeter. In this case, the battery is being charged. If the 
aircraft alternator (or generator) experiences a malfunction, 
the ammeter indicates a negative value. A negative indication 

means current is leaving the battery to power any electrical 
load connected to the bus. The battery is being discharged and 
the aircraft is in danger of losing all electrical power. 

Generator Circuit
Generator circuits are used to control electrical power 
between the aircraft generator and the distribution bus. 
Typically, these circuits are found on older aircraft that have 
not upgraded to an alternator. Generator circuits control 
power to the field winding and electrical power from the 
generator to the electrical bus. A generator master switch is 
used to turn on the generator typically by controlling field 
current. If the generator is spinning and current is sent to 
the field circuit, the generator produces electrical power. 
The power output of the generator is controlled through the 
generator control unit (or voltage regulator). A simplified 
generator control circuit is shown in Figure 9-86. 

As can be seen in Figure 9-86, the generator switch controls 
the power to the generator field (F terminal). The generator 
output current is supplied to the aircraft bus through the 
armature circuit (A terminal) of the generator. 

Alternator Circuit
Alternator circuits, like generator circuits, must control 
power both to and from the alternator. The alternator is  


9-49

G
F

A

Bus
Generator

control
unit

Current
produced

by generator

Current to generator field

35A    MAIN BUS        5A    15A    50A

AVIONICS BUS

Alternator

Ammeter

Battery

External power jack

Starter B
F
A

Starter switch

Master switch

BAT

ALT

Starter solenoid

Ammeter shunt

Master solenoid

External power relay

FAS

BS

Voltage regulator

Avionics master switch

F
A

B
U
S

Alternator
output

Alternator

To ACU

0-60A
Ammeter +

-

To aircraft loads
60A 0A

Figure 9-86. Simplified generator control circuit. 

Figure 9-87. Alternator control circuit. 

Figure 9-88. Typical ammeter circuit used to monitor alternator 
output. 

controlled by the pilot through the alternator master switch. 
The alternator master switch in turn operates a circuit within 
the alternator control unit (or voltage regulator) and sends 
current to the alternator field. If the alternator is powered by the 
aircraft engine, the alternator produces electrical power for the 
aircraft electrical loads. The alternator control circuit contains 
the three major components of the alternator circuit: alternator, 
voltage regulator, and alternator master switch. [Figure 9-87]

The voltage regulator controls the generator field current 
according to aircraft electrical load. If the aircraft engine is 
running and the alternator master switch is on, the voltage 
regulator adjusts current to the alternator field as needed. 
If more current flows to the alternator field, the alternator 

output increases and feeds the aircraft loads through the 
distribution bus. 

All alternators must be monitored for correct output. Most 
light aircraft employ an ammeter to monitor alternator output. 
Figure 9-88 shows a typical ammeter circuit used to monitor 
alternator output. An ammeter placed in the alternator circuit 
is a single polarity meter that shows current flow in only one 
direction. This flow is from the alternator to the bus. Since 


9-50

-
+

+

+

-

External power receptacle
External power solenoid Battery solenoid

Starter
motor

Reverrse polarity diode
Starter switch

To Electrical loads

To Bus
Battery master switch

Aircraft battery

Figure 9-90. A simple external power circuit diagram. 

Figure 9-89. External power receptacle.

the alternator contains diodes in the armature circuit, current 
cannot reverse flow from the bus to the alternator.

When troubleshooting an alternator system, be sure to 
monitor the aircraft ammeter. If the alternator system is 
inoperative, the ammeter gives a zero indication. In this 
case, the battery is being discharged. A voltmeter is also a 
valuable tool when troubleshooting an alternator system. The 
voltmeter should be installed in the electrical system while 
the engine is running and the alternator operating. A system 
operating normally produces a voltage within the specified 
limits (approximately 14 volts or 28 volts depending on the 
electrical system). Consult the aircraft manual and verify the 
system voltage is correct. If the voltage is below specified 
values, the charging system should be inspected.
 
External Power Circuit
Many aircraft employ an external power circuit that provides 
a means of connecting electrical power from a ground source 
to the aircraft. External power is often used for starting the 
engine or maintenance activities on the aircraft. This type of 
system allows operation of various electrical systems without 
discharging the battery. The external power systems typically 
consists of an electrical plug located in a convenient area of 
the fuselage, an electrical solenoid used to connect external 
power to the bus, and the related wiring for the system. A 
common external power receptacle is shown in Figure 9-89. 

Figure 9-90 shows how the external power receptacle 
connects to the external power solenoid through a reverse 
polarity diode. This diode is used to prevent any accidental 
connection in the event the external power supply has the 
incorrect polarity (i.e., a reverse of the positive and negative 
electrical connections). A reverse polarity connection could 
be catastrophic to the aircraft’s electrical system. If a ground 
power source with a reverse polarity is connected, the diode 
blocks current and the external power solenoid does not close. 

This diagram also shows that external power can be used 
to charge the aircraft battery or power the aircraft electrical 
loads. For external power to start the aircraft engine or power 
electrical loads, the battery master switch must be closed. 

Starter Circuit
Virtually all modern aircraft employ an electric motor to start 
the aircraft engine. Since starting the engine requires several 
horsepower, the starter motor can often draw 100 or more 
amperes. For this reason, all starter motors are controlled 
through a solenoid. [Figure 9-91]
 
The starter circuit must be connected as close as practical 
to the battery since large wire is needed to power the starter 
motor and weight savings can be achieved when the battery 
and the starter are installed close to each other in the aircraft. 
As shown in the starter circuit diagram, the start switch can 
be part of a multifunction switch that is also used to control 
the engine magnetos. [Figure 9-92]

The starter can be powered by either the aircraft battery or 
the external power supply. Often when the aircraft battery 


9-51

+

+

-

External power plug
External power solenoid

Starter solenoid Battery (master) solenoid

Starter
motor

Master switch

To split bus

-
+

S

B
R L

OFF

+V

To main bus

+

+

-

External power plug
External power solenoid (NO)

Avionics contactor (NC)
(a.k.a. split bus relay)

To starter
contactor

S

B
R L

OFF

To main
bus

A
V
I
O
N
I
C
S

B
U
S

M
A
I
N

B
U
S

Ignition
switch

D3

D2

D1

Avionics master switch

Figure 9-91. Starter circuit. 

Figure 9-92. Multifunction starter switch.

Figure 9-93. Avionics power circuit.

is weak or in need of charging, the external power circuit is 
used to power the starter. During most typical operations, the 
starter is powered by the aircraft battery. The battery master 
must be on and the master solenoid closed in order to start 
the engine with the battery. 

Avionics Power Circuit
Many aircraft contain a separate power distribution bus 
specifically for electronics equipment. This bus is often 
referred to as an avionics bus. Since modern avionics 
equipment employs sensitive electronic circuits, it is often 
advantageous to disconnect all avionics from electrical power 
to protect their circuits. For example, the avionics bus is often 
depowered when the starter motor is activated. This helps to 
prevent any transient voltage spikes produced by the starter 
from entering the sensitive avionics. [Figure 9-93]

The circuit employs a normally closed (NC) solenoid that 
connects the avionics bus to the main power bus. The 
electromagnet of the solenoid is activated whenever the 
starter is engaged. Current is sent from the starter switch 
through diode D1, causing the solenoid to open and depower 
the avionics bus. At that time, all electronics connected to 
the avionics bus will lose power. The avionics contactor is 
also activated whenever external power is connected to the 
aircraft. In this case, current travels through diodes D2 and 
D3 to the avionics bus contactor. 

A separate avionics power switch may also be used to 
disconnect the entire avionics bus. A typical avionics power 
switch is shown wired in series with the avionics power bus. 
In some cases, this switch is combined with a circuit breaker 


9-52

Figure 9-94. Instrument panel showing the landing gear position switch and the three gear down indicators. 

and performs two functions (called a circuit breaker switch). 
It should also be noted that the avionics contactor is often 
referred to as a split bus relay, since the contactor separates 
(splits) the avionics bus from the main bus. 

Landing Gear Circuit
Another common circuit found on light aircraft operates 
the retractable landing gear systems on high-performance 
light aircraft. These airplanes typically employ a hydraulic 
system to move the gear. After takeoff, the pilot moves 
the gear position switch to the retract position, starting an 
electric motor. The motor operates a hydraulic pump, and the 
hydraulic system moves the landing gear. To ensure correct 
operation of the system, the landing gear electrical system 
is relatively complex. The electrical system must detect the 
position of each gear (right, left, nose) and determine when 
each reaches full up or down; the motor is then controlled 
accordingly. There are safety systems to help prevent 
accidental actuation of the gear. 

A series of limit switches are needed to monitor the position 
of each gear during the operation of the system. (A limit 
switch is simply a spring-loaded, momentary contact switch 
that is activated when a gear reaches it limit of travel.) 
Typically, there are six limit switches located in the landing 
gear wheel wells. The three up-limit switches are used to 

detect when the gear reaches the full retract (UP) position. 
Three down-limit switches are used to detect when the gear 
reach the full extended (DOWN) position. Each of these 
switches is mechanically activated by a component of the 
landing gear assembly when the appropriate gear reaches 
a given limit.

The landing gear system must also provide an indication to 
the pilot that the gear is in a safe position for landing. Many 
aircraft employ a series of three green lights when all three 
gears are down and locked in the landing position. These three 
lights are activated by the up- and down-limit switches found 
in the gear wheel well. A typical instrument panel showing 
the landing gear position switch and the three gears down 
indicators is shown in Figure 9-94. 

The hydraulic motor/pump assembly located in the upper left 
corner of Figure 9-95 is powered through either the UP or 
DOWN solenoids (top left). The solenoids are controlled by 
the gear selector switch (bottom left) and the six landing gear 
limit switches (located in the center of Figure 9-95). The three 
gear DOWN indicators are individual green lights (center of 
Figure 9-95) controlled by the three gear DOWN switches. 
As each gear reaches its DOWN position, the limit switch 
moves to the DOWN position, and the light is illuminated. 


9-53

Terminal #3

Squat switch

Gear selector switch

Throttle switch

Gear unsafe light (red)

Terminal #2

Terminal #1 Control current

Down motor, high current

UP

DOWN

Hydraulic pump motor assembly

AdvancedRetarded

Gear horn

F
L

T
 P

O
S

G
N

D
 P

O
S

L
an

d
in

g
 g

ear
m

o
to

r (25 A
m

p
)

L
an

d
in

g
 g

ear
co

n
tro

l (5 A
m

p
)

30A

C.B.1

5A

C.B.2

N
o

t 
U

P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

N
o

t 
U

P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

N
o

t 
U

P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

UP
limit

DN
limit

UP
limit

DN
limit

UP
limit

DN
limit

R
ig

h
t 

  g
re

en
 

d
o

w
n

   
lig

h
t

N
o

se
   

g
re

en
d

o
w

n
   

lig
h

t

 L
ef

t 
  g

re
en

d
o

w
n

   
lig

h
t

L
E

F
T

 G
E

A
R

N
O

S
E

 G
E

A
R

R
IG

H
T

 G
E

A
R

UPDN

Figure 9-95. Aircraft landing gear schematic while gear is in the DOWN and locked position.

Figure 9-95 shows the landing gear in the full DOWN 
position. It is always important to know gear position 
when reading landing gear electrical diagrams. Knowing 
gear position helps the technician to analyze the diagram 
and understand correct operation of the circuits. Another 

important concept is that more than one circuit is used to 
operate the landing gear. On this system, there is a low 
current control circuit fused at 5 amps (CB2, top right of 
Figure 9-95). This circuit is used for indicator lights and 
the control of the gear motor contactors. There is a separate 


9-54

Terminal #3

Current flow

Squat switch

Gear selector switch

Throttle switch

Gear unsafe light (red)

Terminal #2

Terminal #1 Control current

Down motor, high current

UP

DOWN

Hydraulic pump motor assembly

AdvancedRetarded

Gear horn

F
L

T
 P

O
S

G
N

D
 P

O
S

L
an

d
in

g
 g

ear
m

o
to

r 25 A
m

p
L

an
d

in
g

 g
ear

co
n

tro
l 5 A

m
p

30A

C.B.1

5A

C.B.2
N

o
t 

U
P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

N
o

t 
U

P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

N
o

t 
U

P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

UP
limit

DN
limit

UP
limit

DN
limit

UP
limit

DN
limit

R
ig

h
t 

  g
re

en
d

o
w

n
   

lig
h

t

N
o

se
  g

re
en

d
o

w
n

   
lig

h
t

L
ef

t 
  g

re
en

d
o

w
n

   
lig

h
t

L
E

F
T

 G
E

A
R

N
O

S
E

 G
E

A
R

R
IG

H
T

 G
E

A
R

DOWNUP

Figure 9-96. Landing gear moving down diagram.

circuit to power the gear motor fused at 30 amps (CB3, top 
right of Figure 9-95). Since this circuit carries a large current 
flow, the wires would be as short as practical and carefully 
protected with rubber boots or nylon insulators. 
 
The following paragraphs describe current flow through 
the landing gear circuit as the system moves the gear up 

and down. Be sure to refer to Figure 9-96 often during the 
following discussions. Figure 9-96 shows current flow when 
the gear is traveling to the extend (DOWN) position. Current 
flow is highlighted in red for each description.

To run the gear DOWN motor, current must flow in the control 
circuit leaving CB2 through terminal 1 to the NOT DOWN 


9-55

contacts of the DOWN limit switches, through terminal 3, 
to the DOWN solenoid positive terminal (upper left). The 
negative side of the DOWN solenoid coil is connected to 
ground through the gear selector switch. Remember, the gear 
DOWN switches are wired in parallel and activated when 
the gear reach the full-DOWN position. All three gears must 
reach full-DOWN to shut off the gear DOWN motor. Also 
note that the gear selector switch controls the negative side 
of the gear solenoids. The selector switch has independent 
control of the gear UP and DOWN motors through control 
of the ground circuit to both the UP and DOWN solenoids.

When the landing gear control circuit is sending a positive 
voltage to the DOWN solenoid, and the gear selector 
switch is sending negative voltage, the solenoid magnet is 
energized. When the gear-DOWN solenoid is energized, 
the high-current gear motor circuit sends current from CB1 
through the down solenoid contact points to the gear DOWN 
motor. When the motor runs, the hydraulic pump produces 
pressure and the gear begins to move. When all three gears 
reach the DOWN position, the gear-DOWN switches move 
to the DOWN position, the three green lights illuminate, and 
the gear motor turns off completing the gear-DOWN cycle. 
 
Figure 9-97 shows the landing gear electrical diagram with 
the current flow path shown in red as the gear moves to the 
retract (UP) position. Starting in the top right corner of the 
diagram, current must flow through CB2 in the control circuit 
through terminal 1 to each of the three gear-UP switches. 
With the gear-UP switches in the not UP position, current 
flows to terminal 2 and eventually through the squat switch 
to the UP solenoid electromagnet coil. The UP solenoid coil 
receives negative voltage through the gear selector switch. 
With the UP solenoid coil activated, the UP solenoid closes 
and power travels through the motor circuit. To power the 
motor, current leaves the bus through CB1 to the terminal 
at the DOWN solenoid onward through the UP solenoid to 
the UP motor. (Remember, current cannot travel through the 
DOWN solenoid at this time since the DOWN solenoid is 
not activated.) As the UP motor runs, each gear travels to the 
retract position. As this occurs, the gear UP switches move 
from the NOT UP position to the UP position. When the last 
gear reaches up, the current no longer travels to terminal 2 
and the gear motor turns off. It should be noted that similar 
to DOWN, the gear switches are wired in parallel, which 
means the gear motor continues to run until all three gear 
reach the required position. 

During both the DOWN and UP cycles of the landing gear 
operation, current travels from the limit switches to terminal 
2. From terminal 2, there is a current path through the gear 
selector switch to the gear unsafe light. If the gear selector 
disagrees with the current gear position (e.g., gear is DOWN 

and pilot has selected UP), the unsafe light is illuminated. 
The gear unsafe light is shown at the bottom of Figure 9-96. 

The squat switch (shown mid left of Figure 9-96) is used to 
determine if the aircraft is on the GROUND or in FLIGHT. 
This switch is located on a landing gear strut. When the weight 
of the aircraft compresses the strut, the switch is activated and 
moved to the GROUND position. When the switch is in the 
GROUND position, the gear cannot be retracted and a warning 
horn sounds if the pilot selects gear UP. The squat switch is 
sometimes referred to as the weight-on-wheels switch. 

A throttle switch is also used in conjunction with landing gear 
circuits on most aircraft. If the throttle is retarded (closed) 
beyond a certain point, the aircraft descends and eventually 
lands. Therefore, many manufacturers activate a throttle 
switch whenever engine power is reduced. If engine power 
is reduced too low, a warning horn sounds telling the pilot to 
lower the landing gear. Of course, this horn need not sound 
if the gear is already DOWN or the pilot has selected the 
DOWN position on the gear switch. This same horn also 
sounds if the aircraft is on the ground, and the gear handle 
is moved to the UP position. Figure 9-96 shows the gear 
warning horn in the bottom left corner. 

AC Supply
Many modern light aircraft employ a low-power AC 
electrical system. Commonly, the AC system is used to 
power certain instruments and some lighting that operate 
only using AC. The electroluminescent panel has become 
a popular lighting system for aircraft instrument panels and 
requires AC. Electroluminescent lighting is very efficient 
and lightweight; therefore, excellent for aircraft installations. 
The electroluminescent material is a paste-like substance that 
glows when supplied with a voltage. This material is typically 
molded into a plastic panel and used for lighting.

A device called an inverter is used to supply AC when needed 
for light aircraft. Simply put, the inverter changes DC into 
AC. Two types of inverters may be found on aircraft: rotary 
inverters and static inverters. Rotary inverters are found only 
on older aircraft due to its poor reliability, excess weight, 
and inefficiency. The rotary inverters employee a DC motor 
that spins an AC generator. The unit is typically one unit and 
contains a voltage regulator circuit to ensure voltage stability. 
Most aircraft have a modern static inverter instead of a rotary 
inverter. Static inverters, as the name implies, contain no 
moving parts and use electronic circuitry to convert DC to 
AC. Figure 9-98 shows a static inverter. Whenever AC is 
used on light aircraft, a distribution circuit separated from 
the DC system must be employed. [Figure 9-99]


9-56

Terminal #3

Squat switch

Gear selector switch

Throttle switch

Gear unsafe light (red)

Terminal #2

Terminal #1 Control current

Down motor, high current

UP

DOWN

Hydraulic pump motor assembly

AdvancedRetarded

Gear horn

F
L

T
 P

O
S

G
N

D
 P

O
S

L
an

d
in

g
 g

ear
m

o
to

r (25 A
m

p
)

L
an

d
in

g
 g

ear
co

n
tro

l (5 A
m

p
)

30A

C.B.1

5A

C.B.2

N
o

t 
U

P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

N
o

t 
U

P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

N
o

t 
U

P

U
P

N
o

t 
D

N

D
N

UP
limit

DN
limit

UP
limit

DN
limit

UP
limit

DN
limit

R
ig

h
t 

  g
re

en
 

d
o

w
n

   
lig

h
t

N
o

se
   

g
re

en
d

o
w

n
   

lig
h

t

 L
ef

t 
  g

re
en

d
o

w
n

   
lig

h
t

L
E

F
T

 G
E

A
R

N
O

S
E

 G
E

A
R

R
IG

H
T

 G
E

A
R

DOWN
UP

Current flow

Figure 9-97. Aircraft landing gear schematic while gear is moving to the UP position.

Some aircraft use an inverter power switch to control AC 
power. Many aircraft simply power the inverter whenever the 
DC bus is powered and no inverter power switch is needed. 
On complex aircraft, more than one inverter may be used to 

provide a backup AC power source. Many inverters also offer 
more than one voltage output. Two common voltages found 
on aircraft inverters are 26VAC and 115VAC.


9-57

Inverter power switch (optional)

DC bus

A
C

L
O
A
D
S

Inverter
Various DC loads

115 VAC (optional)

AC loads

Power from
aircraft battery 

or alternator

DC AC

Figure 9-98. A static inverter.

Figure 9-99. Distribution circuit.. 

Light Multiengine Aircraft
Multiengine aircraft typically fly faster, higher, and farther 
than single engine aircraft. Multiengine aircraft are designed 
for added safety and redundancy and, therefore, often contain 
a more complex power distribution system when compared to 
light single-engine aircraft. With two engines, these aircraft 
can drive two alternators (or generators) that supply current 
to the various loads of the aircraft. The electrical distribution 
bus system is also divided into two or more systems. These 
bus systems are typically connected through a series of circuit 
protectors, diodes, and relays. The bus system is designed to 
create a power distribution system that is extremely reliable by 
supplying current to most loads through more than one source.



Paralleling Alternators or Generators
Since two alternators (or generators) are used on twin engine 
aircraft, it becomes vital to ensure both alternators share the 
electrical load equally. This process of equalizing alternator 
outputs is often called paralleling. In general, paralleling is a 
simple process when dealing with DC power systems found 
on light aircraft. If both alternators are connected to the 
same load bus and both alternators produce the same output 
voltage, the alternators share the load equally. Therefore, 
the paralleling systems must ensure both power producers 
maintain system voltage within a few tenths of a volt. For 
most twin-engine aircraft, the voltage would be between 
26.5-volt and 28-volt DC with the alternators operating. A 
simple vibrating point system used for paralleling alternators 
is found in Figure 9-100. 

As can be seen in Figure 9-100, both left and right voltage 
regulators contain a paralleling coil connected to the output 
of each alternator. This paralleling coil works in conjunction 
with the voltage coil of the regulator to ensure proper 
alternator output. The paralleling coils are wired in series 
between the output terminals of both alternators. Therefore, if 
the two alternators provide equal voltages, the paralleling coil 
has no effect. If one alternator has a higher voltage output, 
the paralleling coils create the appropriate magnetic force to 
open/close the contact points, controlling field current and 
control alternator output. 

Today’s aircraft employ solid-state control circuits to ensure 
proper paralleling of the alternators. Older aircraft use 
vibrating point voltage regulators or carbon-pile regulators 
to monitor and control alternator output. For the most part, 
all carbon-pile regulators have been replaced except on 
historic aircraft. Many aircraft still maintain a vibrating point 
system, although these systems are no longer being used on  


9-58

Alternator
output to bus

Alternator
output to bus

Left
alternator

A+ F

Generator control

A+ F
Right

alternator

Paralleling switch

To voltage
regulator and
circuit breaker

To voltage
regulator and
circuit breaker

Paralleling
coil

Paralleling
coil

Voltage
coil

Voltage
coil

Left voltage regulator and alternator Right voltage regulator and alternator

Figure 9-100. Vibrating point system used for paralleling alternators.

contemporary aircraft. The different types of voltage 
regulators were described earlier in this chapter. 

Power Distribution on Multiengine Aircraft 
The power distribution systems found on modern multiengine 
aircraft contain several distribution points (buses) and a 
variety of control and protection components to ensure 
the reliability of electrical power. As aircraft employ more 
electronics to perform various tasks, the electrical power 
systems becomes more complex and more reliable. One 
means to increase reliability is to ensure more than one 
power source can be used to power any given load. Another 
important design concept is to supply critical electrical 
loads from more than one bus. Twin-engine aircraft, such 
as a typical corporate jet or commuter aircraft, have two 
DC generators; they also have multiple distribution buses 
fed from each generator. Figure 9-101 shows a simplified 
diagram of the power distribution system for a twin-engine 
turboprop aircraft.

This aircraft contains two starter generator units used to start 
the engines and generate DC electrical power. The system 
is typically defined as a split-bus power distribution system 
since there is a left and right generator bus that splits (shares) 
the electrical loads by connecting to each sub-bus through 
a diode and current limiter. The generators are operated in 
parallel and equally carry the loads. 

The primary power supplied for this aircraft is DC, although 
small amounts of AC are supplied by two inverters. The 
aircraft diagram shows the AC power distribution at the top 
and mid left side of the diagram. One inverter is used for main 
AC power and the second operated in standby and ready as a 
backup. Both inverters produce 26-volt AC and 115-volt AC. 
There is an inverter select relay operated by a pilot controlled 
switch used to choose which inverter is active. 

The hot battery bus (right side of Figure 9-101) shows a direct 
connection to the aircraft battery. This bus is always hot if 
there is a charged battery in the aircraft. Items powered by this 
bus may include some basics like the entry door lighting and 
the aircraft clock, which should always have power available. 
Other items on this bus would be critical to flight safety, such 
as fire extinguishers, fuel shut offs, and fuel pumps. During 
a massive system failure, the hot battery bus is the last bus 
on the aircraft that should fail. 

If the battery switch is closed and the battery relay activated, 
battery power is connected to the main battery bus and the 
isolation bus. The main battery bus carries current for engine 
starts and external power. So the main battery bus must 
be large enough to carry the heaviest current loads of the 
aircraft. It is logical to place this bus as close as practical to 
the battery and starters and to ensure the bus is well protected 
from shorts to ground. 


9-59

INV
No. 1

1
1

5
 V

 A
C

Right gen control

+ −

+ −

Left gen control

Left
starter

gen

Right
starter

gen

+

−

INV
No. 2

Left gen bus

Right gen bus

26 V AC

115 V AC

Relay
panel

T
o
 A

C
 lo

a
d
s 

(2
6
V

 A
C

) T
o
 A

C
 lo

a
d

s 
(1

1
5

V
 A

C
)

2
6
V

 A
C

1
1
5
V

 A
C

N
o

. 4
 D

U
A

L
 F

E
D

 B
U

S

N
o

. 3
 D

U
A

L
 F

E
D

 B
U

S

N
o

. 2
 D

U
A

L
 F

E
D

 B
U

S

N
o

. 1
 D

U
A

L
 F

E
D

 B
U

S

IS
O

L
A

T
IO

N
 B

U
S

T
o
 m

is
ce

lla
n
e
o
u
s 

D
C

 lo
a
d
s

T
o
 m

is
ce

lla
n
e
o
u
s 

D
C

 lo
a
d
s

T
o
 m

is
ce

lla
n
e
o
u
s 

D
C

 lo
a
d
s

T
o
 m

is
ce

lla
n
e
o
u
s 

D
C

 lo
a
d
s

Current limiter

Current limiter

M
A

IN
 B

A
T

T
E

R
Y

 B
U

S

S
U

B
 B

U
S

Right
start
relay

Left
start
relay

EXT power connection

H
O

T
 B

A
T

T
E

R
Y

 B
U

S

EXT power
relay

L
o
a
d
s 

p
o
w

e
re

d
 b

y 
h
o
t 

b
a
tt

e
ry

 b
u
s

Battery
Battery sw

Avionics bus No. 2

Avionics bus No. 2
power relay

To avionics
master control CB

Avionics bus No. 1

OFF ON
Avionics No. 1
power relay

Avionics bus No. 3

Avionics bus No. 3
power relay (optional)

50 A

60A

50A

60A

Figure 9-101. Diagram of the power distribution system for a twin-engine turboprop aircraft. 

The isolation bus connects to the left and right buses and 
receives power whenever the main battery bus is energized. 
The isolation bus connects output of the left and right 
generators in parallel. The output of the two generators is 
then sent to the loads through additional buses. The generator 
buses are connected to the isolation bus through a fuse known 

as a current limiter. Current limiters are high amperage 
fuses that isolate buses if a short circuit occurs. There are 
several current limiters used in this system for protection 
between buses. As can be seen in Figure 9-101, a current 
limiter symbol looks like two triangles pointed toward each 
other. The current limiter between the isolation bus and the 


9-60

Right
main

generator
bus

Circuit breaker

Circuit breaker

Reverse polarity diode

Reverse polarity diode

Current limiter

Current limiter
Main generator bus

Dual fed bus # 1

Dual fed bus # 2

Figure 9-102. Dual-feed bus system. 

main generator buses are rated at 325 amps and can only be 
replaced on the ground. Most current limiters are designed 
for ground replacement only and only after the malfunction 
that caused the excess current draw is repaired. 

The left and right DC generators are connected to their 
respective main generator buses. Each generator feeds its 
respective bus, and since the buses are connected under 
normal circumstances, the generators operate in parallel. 
Both generators feed all loads together. If one generator 
fails or a current limiter opens, the generators can operate 
independently. This design allows for redundancy in the 
event of failure and provides battery backup in the event of 
a dual generator failure. 

In the center of Figure 9-101 are four dual-feed electrical 
buses. These buses are considered dual-feed since they receive 
power from both the left and right generator buses. If a fault 
occurs, either generator bus can power any or all loads on a 
dual-feed bus. During the design phase of the aircraft, the 
electrical loads must be evenly distributed between each of 
the dual-feed buses. It is also important to power redundant 
systems from different buses. For example, the pilot’s 
windshield heat would be powered by a different bus from 
the one that powers the copilot’s windshield heat. If one bus 
fails, at least one windshield heat continues to work properly, 
and the aircraft can be landed safely in icing conditions. 

Notice that the dual-feed buses are connected to the main 
generator buses through both a current limiter and a diode. 
Remember, a diode allows current flow in only one direction. 
[Figure 9-102]

The current can flow from the generator bus to the dual-feed 
bus, but the current cannot flow from the dual fed bus to the 
main generator bus. The diode is placed in the circuit so the 
main bus must be more positive than the sub bus for current 
flow. This circuit also contains a current limiter and a circuit 
breaker. The circuit breaker is located on the flight deck and 
can be reset by the pilot. The current limiter can only be 
replaced on the ground by a technician. The circuit breaker is 
rated at a slightly lower current value than the current limiter; 
therefore, the circuit breaker should open if a current overload 

exists. If the circuit breaker fails to open, the current limiter 
provides backup protection and disconnects the circuit. 

Large Multiengine Aircraft
Transport category aircraft typically carry hundreds of 
passengers and fly thousands of miles each trip. Therefore, 
large aircraft require extremely reliable power distribution 
systems that are computer controlled. These aircraft have 
multiple power sources (AC generators) and a variety of 
distribution buses. A typical airliner contains two or more 
main AC generators driven by the aircraft turbine engines, 
as well as more than one backup AC generator. DC systems 
are also employed on large aircraft and the ship’s battery is 
used to supply emergency power in case of a multiple failures. 
 
The AC generator (sometimes called an alternator) produces 
three-phase 115-volt AC at 400 Hz. AC generators were 
discussed previously in this chapter. Since most modern 
transport category aircraft are designed with two engines, 
there are two main AC generators. The APU also drives an 
AC generator. This unit is available during flight if one of the 
main generators fails. The main and auxiliary generators are 
typically similar in output capacity and supply a maximum 
of 110 kilovolt amps (KVA). A fourth generator, driven by 
an emergency ram air turbine, is also available in the event 
the two main generators and one auxiliary generator fail. 
The emergency generator is typically smaller and produces 
less power. With four AC generators available on modern 
aircraft, it is highly unlikely that a complete power failure 
occurs. However, if all AC generators are lost, the aircraft 
battery will continue to supply DC electrical power to operate 
vital systems. 

AC Power Systems
Transport category aircraft use large amounts of electrical 
power for a variety of systems. Passenger comfort requires 
power for lighting, audio visual systems, and galley power 
for food warmers and beverage coolers. A variety of electrical 
systems are required to fly the aircraft, such as flight control 
systems, electronic engine controls, communication, and 
navigation systems. The output capacity of one engine-driven 
AC generator can typically power all necessary electrical 


9-61

BPCU
CT output

Current transformer

Main AC power cable

Figure 9-103. Current transformer. 

systems. A second engine-driven generator is operated during 
flight to share the electrical loads and provide redundancy. 

The complexity of multiple generators and a variety of 
distribution buses requires several control units to maintain 
a constant supply of safe electrical power. The AC electrical 
system must maintain a constant output of 115 to 120 volts at 
a frequency of 400 Hz (±10 percent). The system must ensure 
power limits are not exceeded. AC generators are connected 
to the appropriate distribution buses at the appropriate time, 
and generators are in phase when needed. There is also the 
need to monitor and control any external power supplied to 
the aircraft, as well as control of all DC electrical power. 

Two electronic line replaceable units are used to control the 
electrical power on a typical large aircraft. The  generator 
control unit (GCU) is used for control of AC generator 
functions, such as voltage regulation and frequency control. 
The  bus power control unit (BPCU) is used to control 
the distribution of electrical power between the various 
distribution buses on the aircraft. The GCU and BPCU 
work together to control electrical power, detect faults, take 
corrective actions when needed, and report any defect to the 
pilots and the aircraft’s central maintenance system. There 
is typically one GCU for each AC generator and at least one 
BPCU to control bus connections. These LRUs are located 
in the aircraft’s electronics equipment bay and are designed 
for easy replacement. 

When the pilot calls for generator power by activating the 
generator control switch on the flight deck, the GCU monitors 
the system to ensure correct operation. If all systems are 
operating within limits, the GCU energizes the appropriate 
generator circuits and provides voltage regulation for the 
system. The GCU also monitors AC output to ensure a 
constant 400-Hz frequency. If the generator output is within 
limits, the GCU then connects the electrical power to the main 
generator bus through an electrical contactor (solenoid). These 
contactors are often called generator breakers (GB) since 
they break (open) or make (close) the main generator circuit. 

After generator power is available, the BPCU activates various 
contactors to distribute the electrical power. The BPCU 
monitors the complete electrical system and communicates 
with the GCU to ensure proper operation. The BPCU employs 
remote current sensors known as a current transformers (CT) 
to monitor the system. [Figure 9-103]

A CT is an inductive unit that surrounds the main power 
cables of the electrical distribution system. As AC power 
flows through the main cables, the CT receives an induced 
voltage. The amount of CT voltage is directly related to the 
current flowing through the cable. The CT connects to the 

BPCU, which allows accurate current monitoring of the 
system. A typical aircraft employs several CTs throughout 
the electrical system. 

The BPCU is a dedicated computer that controls the electrical 
connections between the various distribution buses found on 
the aircraft. The BPCU uses contactors (solenoids) called bus 
tie breakers (BTB) for connection of various circuits. These 
BTBs open/close the connections between the buses as needed 
for system operation as called for by the pilots and the BPCU. 
This sounds like a simple task, yet to ensure proper operation 
under a variety of conditions, the bus system becomes very 
complex. There are three common types of distribution bus 
systems found on transport category aircraft: split bus, parallel 
bus, and split parallel. 

Split-Bus Power Distribution Systems 

Modern twin-engine aircraft, such as the Boeing 737, 757, 
777, Airbus A-300, A-320, and A-310, employ a split-bus 
power distribution system. During normal conditions, each 
engine-driven AC generator powers only one main AC bus. 
The buses are kept split from each other, and two generators 
can never power the same bus simultaneously. This is very 
important since the generator output current is not phase 
regulated. (If two out-of-phase generators were connected 
to the same bus, damage to the system would occur.) The 
split-bus system does allow both engine-driven generators 
to power any given bus, but not at the same time. Generators 
must remain isolated from each other to avoid damage. The 
GCUs and BPCU ensures proper generator operation and 
power distribution.

On all modern split bus systems, the APU can be started 
and operated during flight. This allows the APU generator 
to provide back-up power in the event of a main generator 
failure. A fourth emergency generator powered by the ram air 
turbine is also available if the other generators fail. 


9-62

AC BUS 1 AC BUS 2

AC ESS

AC ESS INV

DC BUS 1 DC BUS 2BAT BUSDC

HOT BUS 1 HOT BUS 2 DC ESS BUS

STAT INV

EXT
PWR

BAT 2BAT 1

TR 1 TR 2

BTB 1 BTB 2

GB 1 APB GB 2 EGB

ESS TR

GEN
1

APU
GEN

GEN
2

EMER
GEN

Figure 9-104. Schematic of split-bus power distribution system.

The four AC generators are shown at the bottom of 
Figure 9-104. These generators are connected to their 
respective buses through the generator breakers. For example, 
generator 1 sends current through GB1 to AC bus 1. AC bus 
1 feeds a variety of primary electrical loads, and also feeds 
sub-buses that in turn power additional loads. 

With both generators operating and all systems normal, AC 
bus 1 and AC bus 2 are kept isolated. Typically during flight, 
the APB (bottom center of Figure 9-104) would be open and 
the APU generator off; the emergency generator (bottom 
right) would also be off and disconnected. If generator one 
should fail, the following happens: 

1.  The GB 1 is opened by the GCU to disconnect the 
failed generator. 

2.  The BPCU closes BTB 1 and BTB 2. This supplies 
AC power to AC bus 1 from generator 2. 

3.  The pilots start the APU and connect the APU 
generator. At that time, the BPCU and GCUs move the 
appropriate BTBs to correctly configure the system so 
the APU powers bus 1 and generator 2 powers bus 2. 

Once again, two AC generators operate independently 
to power AC bus 1 and 2. 

If all generators fail, AC is also available through the static 
inverter (center of Figure 9-104). The inverter is powered 
from the hot battery bus and used for essential AC loads if all 
AC generators fail. Of course, the GCUs and BPCU take the 
appropriate actions to disconnect defective units and continue 
to feed essential AC loads using inverter power.

To produce DC power, AC bus 1 sends current to its 
transformer rectifier (TR), TR 1 (center left of Figure 9-104). 
The TR unit is used to change AC to DC. The TR contains 
a transformer to step down the voltage from 115-volt AC to 
26-volt AC and a rectifier to change the 26-volt AC to 26-
volt DC. The output of the TR is therefore compatible with 
the aircraft battery at 26-volt DC. Since DC power is not 
phase sensitive, the DC buses are connected during normal 
operation. In the event of a bus problem, the BPCU may 
isolate one or more DC buses to ensure correct distribution 
of DC power. This aircraft contains two batteries that are 
used to supply emergency DC power. 


9-63

DC BUS 2

HOT BAT BUS

DC BUS 1

SYNC BUSESS AC BUS

GEN
1

GEN
2

GEN
3

APU
GEN

GB GB GB

BTB BTB BTB

GB

AC BUS 1 AC BUS 2 AC BUS 3

ESS TR TR  1 TR 2

115V

28V  DC    ESS

BUS

BAT       BUS

R52

R56

EXT
PWR

RECP1

R52

Figure 9-105. Parallel power distribution system.

Parallel Systems

Multiengine aircraft, such as the Boeing 727, MD-11, and 
the early Boeing 747, employ a parallel power distribution 
system. During normal flight conditions, all engine-driven 
generators connect together and power the AC loads. In this 
configuration, the generators are operated in parallel; hence 
the name parallel power distribution system. In a parallel 
system, all generator output current must be phase regulated. 
Before generators are connected to the same bus, their output 
frequency must be adjusted to ensure the AC output reaches 
the positive and negative peaks simultaneously. During the 
flight, generators must maintain this in-phase condition for 
proper operation. 

One advantage of parallel systems is that in the event of a 
generator failure, the buses are already connected and the 
defective generator need only be isolated from the system. 
A paralleling bus, or synchronizing bus, is used to connect 
the generators during flight. The synchronizing bus is often 
referred to as the sync bus. Most of these systems are less 
automated and require that flight crew monitor systems and 
manually control bus contactors. BTBs are operated by the 

flight crew through the electrical control panel and used to 
connect all necessary buses. GBs are used to connect and 
disconnect the generators.

Figure 9-105 shows a simplified parallel power distribution 
system. This aircraft employs three main-engine driven 
generators and one APU generator. The APU (bottom right) 
is not operational in flight and cannot provide backup power. 
The APU generator is for ground operations only. The three 
main generators (bottom of Figure 9-105) are connected to 
their respective AC bus through GBs one, two, and three. 
The AC buses are connected to the sync bus through three 
BTBs. In this manner, all three generators share the entire AC 
electrical loads. Keep in mind, all generators connected to 
the sync bus must be in phase. If a generator fails, the flight 
crew would simply isolate the defective generator and the 
flight would continue without interruption. 

The number one and two DC buses (Figure 9-105 top left) 
are used to feed the DC electrical loads of the aircraft. DC 
bus 1 receives power form AC bus 1 though TR1. DC bus 
2 is fed in a similar manner from AC bus 2. The DC buses 


9-64

GEN
1

GEN
2

GEN
3

GEN
4

GCB 1

BTB 1

AC LOAD BUS 1

GCB 2

BTB 2

AC LOAD BUS 2

LEFT SYNC BUS

GCB 2

BTB 2

AC LOAD BUS 2

GCB 3

BTB 3

AC LOAD BUS 3

GCB 4

BTB 4

AC LOAD BUS 4

LEFT SYNC BUS

APU 1

EXP

APB

External power 1

RIGHT SYNC BUS

APU 2

EXP

APB

External power 2

SSB

Figure 9-106. Split-parallel distribution system. 

also connect to the battery bus and eventually to the battery. 
The essential DC bus (top left) can be fed from DC bus 1 
or the essential TR. A diode prevents the essential DC bus 
from powering DC bus 1. The essential DC bus receives 
power from the essential TR, which receives power from the 
essential AC bus. This provides an extra layer of redundancy 
since the essential AC bus can be isolated and fed from any 
main generator. Figure 9-105 shows generator 3 powering 
the essential AC bus. 

Split-Parallel Systems

A split-parallel bus basically employs the best of both split- 
bus and the parallel-bus systems. The split-parallel system 
is found on the Boeing 747-400 and contains four generators 
driven by the main engines and two APU-driven generators. 
The system can operate with all generators in parallel, or 
the generators can be operated independently as in a split- 
bus system. During a normal flight, all four engine-driven 
generators are operated in parallel. The system is operated 
in split-bus mode only under certain failure conditions or 
when using external power. The Boeing 747-400 split-
parallel system is computer controlled using four GCU and 
two BPCU. There is one GCU controlling each generator; 
BPCU 1 controls the left side bus power distribution, and 
BPCU 2 controls the right side bus power. The GCUs and 
BPCUs operate similarly to those previously discussed under 
the split-bus system. 

Figure 9-106 shows a simplified split-parallel power 
distribution system. The main generators (top of Figure 9-106) 
are driven by the main turbine engines. Each generator is 
connected to its load bus through a generator control breaker 
(GCB). The generator control unit closes the GCB when the 
pilot calls for generator power and all systems are operating 
normally. Each load bus is connected to various electrical 
systems and additional sub-buses. The BTB are controlled 
by the BPCU and connect each load bus to the left and right 
sync bus. A split systems breaker (SSB) is used to connect 
the left and right sync buses and is closed during a normal 
flight. With the SSB, GCBs, and BTBs, in the closed position 
the generators operate in parallel. When operating in parallel, 
all generators must be in phase. 

If the aircraft electrical system experiences a malfunction, 
the control units make the appropriate adjustments to ensure 
all necessary loads receive electrical power. For example, if 
generator 1 fails, GCU 1 detects the fault and command GCB 
1 to open. With GCB 1 open, load bus 1 now  feeds from 
the sync bus and the three operating generators. In another 
example, if load bus 4 should short to ground, BPCU 4 opens 
the GCB 4 and BTB 4. This isolates the shorted bus (load 
bus 4). All loads on the shorted bus are no longer powered, 
and generator 4 is no longer available. However, with three 
remaining generators operational, the flight continues safely. 
As do all large aircraft, the Boeing 747-400 contains a DC 


9-65

R
 A

L
T

 B
U

S
L
 A

L
T

 B
U

S

Bat 2

Bat 1

B
A

T
 B

U
S

 2
B

A
T

 B
U

S
 1

R
 G

E
N

 T
IE

 B
u
s

L
 G

E
N

 T
IE

 B
u
s

E
M

E
R

 T
IE

 B
u
s

E
S

S
 D

C
 B

u
s

M
A

IN
 D

C
 B

u
s

A
C

 E
X

T
 P

W
R

Equip AC BUS

M
A

IN
 I
N

V
 B

U
S

S
E

C
 I

N
V

 B
U

S
IN

S
T

 I
N

V
 B

U
S

E

R GEN
EMER RLY

E

L GEN
EMER RLY

N

NORM BAT 
RLY 2

N

NORM BAT 
RLY 1

E

EMER BAT 
RLY2A 

E

EMER BAT 
RLY 1A

E

EMER BAT 
RLY 2 

E

EMER BAT 
RLY 1

N

L
FOR RLY

CONT
RLY 1

RCCO

DC
EXT PWR
DIST RLY

DC
EXT PWR

RLY

N

N

BUS TIE
RLY 2

BUS TIE
RLY 1

E

EMER
BUS RLY

EMER
FEEDER

N

RCCOR GEN

R GEN R FEEDER

L FEEDER

L GEN

PROTECTORS

R
FWD

R
AFT

PROTECTORS
L

FWD
L

AFT

T
R

 R
C

C
O

EMER
200A

TRANS 
RECT

APU
ALT

L
ALT

R
ALT

CONT
RLY

CONT
RLY

CONT
RLY

CONT
RLY

CONT
RLY

INV B
T/R

INV C
T/R

INV A
T/R

R
 A

C
 M

O
N

 B
U

S
L
 A

C
 M

O
N

 B
U

S

DC
EXT
PWR

INV
C

INV
B

INV
A

INV
E

SEC INV
BUS CONT

RLY

MAIN INV
BUS CONT

RLY

INST INV
BUS CONT

RLY

DC
EXT
PWR

TIR
CONT RLY

Windows
 & lights

EXT PWR
CONT RLY

APU ALT
CONT RLY

L ALT
CONT RLY

Figure 9-107. Block diagram of an aircraft electrical system.

power distribution system. The DC system is used for battery 
and emergency operations. The DC system is similar to those 
previously discussed, powered by TR units. The TRs are 
connected to the AC buses and convert AC into 26-volt DC. 
The DC power systems are the final backups in the event of 
a catastrophic electrical failure. The systems most critical to 
fly the aircraft can typically receive power from the battery. 
This aircraft also contains two static inverters to provide 
emergency AC power when needed. 

Wiring Installation
Wiring Diagrams 
Electrical wiring diagrams are included in most aircraft 
service manuals and specify information, such as the size 
of the wire and type of terminals to be used for a particular 
application. Furthermore, wiring diagrams typically identify 
each component within a system by its part number and its 
serial number, including any changes that were made during 
the production run of an aircraft. Wiring diagrams are often 
used for troubleshooting electrical malfunctions.

Block Diagrams
A block diagram is used as an aid for troubleshooting complex 
electrical and electronic systems. A block diagram consists of 
individual blocks that represent several components, such as a 
printed circuit board or some other type of replaceable module. 
Figure 9-107 is a block diagram of an aircraft electrical system.

Pictorial Diagrams
In a pictorial diagram, pictures of components are used 
instead of the conventional electrical symbols found 
in schematic diagrams. A pictorial diagram helps the 
maintenance technician visualize the operation of a  
system. [Figure 9-108]

Schematic Diagrams
A schematic diagram is used to illustrate a principle of 
operation, and therefore does not show parts as they actually 
appear or function. [Figure 9-109] However, schematic 
diagrams do indicate the location of components with 
respect to each other. Schematic diagrams are best utilized 
for troubleshooting.

Wire Types
The satisfactory performance of any modern aircraft depends 
to a very great degree on the continuing reliability of electrical 
systems and subsystems. Improperly or carelessly maintained 
wiring can be a source of both immediate and potential 
danger. The continued proper performance of electrical 
systems depends on the knowledge and techniques of the 
technician who installs, inspects, and maintains the electrical 
system wires and cables.

Procedures and practices outlined in this section are general 
recommendations and are not intended to replace the 
manufacturer’s instructions and approved practices.


9-66

LEFT MAIN AC BUS RIGHT MAIN AC BUS AC GH BUS

GND SVC BUS

SYSTEM ARINC 629 BUSSES

APBGCB

BTB BTBTIE BUS

GCB
GHR

GSTR

GSSR

PRI
EP

Analog control

APU
GCU

BPCU RIGHT
GCU

LEFT
GCU

AUTO
ISLN

ON
OFF

L BUS TIE

L GEN CTRL

AUTO
ISLN

ON
OFF

R BUS TIE

R GEN CTRL

ON
OFF

APU GEN

APU
GEN

RIGHT 
IDGLEFT

IDG

L TRU

L XFR

L MAIN AC

L UTIL

L DC

HOT BAT BAT

MAIN BAT
CHARGER

MAIN
BATTERY

L FCDC PSA C FCDC PSA R FCDC PSASTANDBY AC

STATIC
INVERTER BAT 2

CPT FIL INST F/0 FIL INST

TRU C1 TRU C2

R TRU

R DC

GND SVC

APU BAT

APU BAT
CHARGER

APU
BATTERY

BACKUP GEN
CONVERTER R UTIL

R XFR

R MAIN AC

GH DC

GH AC

GH TRU

L
IDG BUGEN

R
IDGBUGEN

APU
GEN

RAT
GEN

L GCB

L TBB

PMG

APB
SEC
EPC PRI

EPC

L BTB R BTB

R GCB
GHR

L CCB R CCB

L UB
ELCU

R UB
ELCU

R TBB

GSTR

DC BUS
TIE RLY

TRU C1 RLY TRU C2 RLY
GSSR

MAIN
BAT. RLY BAT - CPT

ISLN RLY

CPT - F/0
BUS TIE RLY

GND PWR
BAT. RLYAC STBY

PWR RLY

PRIMARY
EXT PWR

PMG

SECONDARY
EXT PWR

BAT
PMG
(L1)

BAT
PMG
(R1)

BAT
PMG
(L2, R2)

Figure 9-108. Pictorial diagram of an aircraft electrical system.

Figure 9-109. Schematic diagram. 


9-67

ConductorsWire single solid conductor

Solid conductor Stranded conductor

A B

 Tensile strength (lb-in)

Tensile strength for same conductivity (lb)

Weight for same conductivity (lb)

Cross section for same conductivity (CM)

Specific resistance (ohm/mil ft)

 Characteristic Copper Aluminum

 55,000

 55,000

  100

  100

  10.6

25,000

40,000

48

160

17

Figure 9-110. Aircraft electrical cable. 

Figure 9-111. Shielded wire harness. 

Figure 9-112. Aircraft electrical cable.

A wire is described as a single, solid conductor, or as a 
stranded conductor covered with an insulating material. 
Figure 9-110 illustrates these two definitions of a wire. 
Because of in-flight vibration and flexing, conductor round 
wire should be stranded to minimize fatigue breakage.

The term “cable,” as used in aircraft electrical installations, 
includes:

1. Two or more separately insulated conductors in the 
same jacket.

2. Two or more separately insulated conductors twisted 
together (twisted pair).

3. One or more insulated conductors covered with a 
metallic braided shield (shielded cable).

4. A single insulated center conductor with a metallic 
braided outer conductor (radio frequency cable). 

The term “wire harness” is used when an array of insulated 
conductors are bound together by lacing cord, metal bands, 
or other binding in an arrangement suitable for use only in 
specific equipment for which the harness was designed; it 
may include terminations. Wire harnesses are extensively 
used in aircraft to connect all the electrical components. 
[Figure 9-111]

For many years, the standard wire in light aircraft has been 
MIL-W-5086A, which uses a tin-coated copper conductor 
rated at 600 volts and temperatures of 105 °C. This basic wire 
is then coated with various insulating coatings. Commercial 
and military aircraft use wire that is manufactured under 
MIL-W-22759 specification, which complies with current 
military and FAA requirements. 

The most important consideration in the selection of aircraft 
wire is properly matching the wire’s construction to the 
application environment. Wire construction that is suitable for 
the most severe environmental condition to be encountered 
should be selected. Wires are typically categorized as being 
suitable for either open wiring or protected wiring application. 
The wire temperature rating is typically a measure of the 
insulation’s ability to withstand the combination of ambient 
temperature and current-related conductor temperature rise.

Conductor
The two most generally used conductors are copper and 
aluminum. Each has characteristics that make its use 
advantageous under certain circumstances. Also, each has 
certain disadvantages. Copper has a higher conductivity; is 
more ductile; has relatively high tensile strength; and can be 
easily soldered. Copper is more expensive and heavier than 
aluminum. Although aluminum has only about 60 percent of 
the conductivity of copper, it is used extensively. Its lightness 
makes possible long spans, and its relatively large diameter 
for a given conductivity reduces corona (the discharge of 
electricity from the wire when it has a high potential). The 
discharge is greater when small diameter wire is used than 
when large diameter wire is used. Some bus bars are made of 
aluminum instead of copper where there is a greater radiating 
surface for the same conductance. The characteristics of 
copper and aluminum are compared in Figure 9-112.


9-68

Figure 9-113. Shielded wire harness for flight control.

Plating
Bare copper develops a surface oxide coating at a rate 
dependent on temperature. This oxide film is a poor conductor 
of electricity and inhibits determination of wire. Therefore, 
all aircraft wiring has a coating of tin, silver, or nickel that 
has far slower oxidation rates.

1. Tin-coated copper is a very common plating material. 
Its ability to be successfully soldered without 
highly active fluxes diminishes rapidly with time 
after manufacture. It can be used up to the limiting 
temperature of 150 °C.

2. Silver-coated wire is used where temperatures do not 
exceed 200 °C (392 °F).

3. Nickel-coated wire retains its properties beyond 
260 °C, but most aircraft wire using such coated 
strands has insulation systems that cannot exceed 
that temperature on long-term exposure. Soldered 
terminations of nickel-plated conductor require the 
use of different solder sleeves or flux than those used 
with tin- or silver-plated conductor.

Insulation
Two fundamental properties of insulation materials are 
insulation resistance and dielectric strength. These are 
entirely different and distinct properties.

Insulation resistance is the resistance to current leakage 
through and over the surface of insulation materials. 
Insulation resistance can be measured with a megohmmeter/
insulation tester without damaging the insulation, and data so 
obtained serves as a useful guide in determining the general 
condition of the insulation. However, the data obtained in 
this manner may not give a true picture of the condition of 
the insulation. Clean, dry insulation having cracks or other 
faults might show a high value of insulation resistance but 
would not be suitable for use.

Dielectric strength is the ability of the insulator to withstand 
potential difference and is usually expressed in terms of 
the voltage at which the insulation fails because of the 
electrostatic stress. Maximum dielectric strength values can 
be measured by raising the voltage of a test sample until the 
insulation breaks down.

The type of conductor insulation material varies with the 
type of installation. Characteristics should be chosen based 
on environment, such as abrasion resistance, arc resistance, 
corrosion resistance, cut-through strength, dielectric strength, 
flame resistant, mechanical strength, smoke emission, fluid 
resistance, and heat distortion. Such types of insulation 
materials (e.g., PVC/nylon, Kapton®, and Teflon®) are 
no longer used for new aircraft designs, but might still 

be installed on older aircraft. Insulation materials for new 
aircraft designs are made of Tefzel®, Teflon®/Kapton®/
Teflon® and PTFE/Polyimide/PTFE. The development of 
better and safer insulation materials is ongoing.

Since electrical wire may be installed in areas where 
inspection is infrequent over extended periods of time, it 
is necessary to give special consideration to heat-aging 
characteristics in the selection of wire. Resistance to heat is 
of primary importance in the selection of wire for aircraft 
use, as it is the basic factor in wire rating. Where wire may 
be required to operate at higher temperatures due either 
to high ambient temperatures, high current loading, or a 
combination of the two, selection should be made on the 
basis of satisfactory performance under the most severe 
operating conditions.

Wire Shielding
With the increase in number of highly sensitive electronic 
devices found on modern aircraft, it has become very 
important to ensure proper shielding for many electric circuits. 
Shielding is the process of applying a metallic covering 
to wiring and equipment to eliminate electromagnetic 
interference (EMI). EMI is caused when electromagnetic 
fields (radio waves) induce high frequency (HF) voltages in 
a wire or component. The induced voltage can cause system 
inaccuracies or even failure.

Use of shielding with 85 percent coverage or greater is 
recommended. Coaxial, triaxial, twinaxial, or quadraxial 
cables should be used, wherever appropriate, with their 
shields connected to ground at a single point or multiple 
points, depending upon the purpose of the shielding. 
[Figure 9-113] The airframe grounded structure may also 
be used as an EMI shield.


9-69

Figure 9-114. Wire harness with protective jacket.

Wire Substitutions
When a replacement wire is required in the repair and 
modification of existing aircraft, the maintenance manual 
for that aircraft must first be reviewed to determine if the 
original aircraft manufacturer (OAM) has approved any 
substitution. If not, then the manufacturer must be contacted 
for an acceptable replacement.

Areas Designated as Severe Wind and Moisture 
Problem (SWAMP) 
SWAMP areas differ from aircraft to aircraft but are usually  
wheel wells, near wing flaps, wing folds, pylons, and other 
exterior areas that may have a harsh environment. Wires 
in these areas have often an exterior jacket to protect them 
from the environment. Wires for these applications often 
have design features incorporated into their construction 
that may make the wire unique; therefore, an acceptable 
substitution may be difficult, if not impossible, to find. It 
is very important to use the wire type recommended in the 
aircraft manufacturer’s maintenance handbook. Insulation or 
jacketing varies according to the environment. [Figure 9-114]

Wire Size Selection
Wire is manufactured in sizes according to a standard 
known as the American wire gauge (AWG). As shown in 
Figure 9-115, the wire diameters become smaller as the 
gauge numbers become larger. Typical wire sizes range from 
a number 40 to number 0000. 

Gauge numbers are useful in comparing the diameter of wires, 
but not all types of wire or cable can be measured accurately 
with a gauge. Larger wires are usually stranded to increase 
their flexibility. In such cases, the total area can be determined 
by multiplying the area of one strand (usually computed in 
circular mils when diameter or gauge number is known) by 
the number of strands in the wire or cable.

Several factors must be considered in selecting the size of 
wire for transmitting and distributing electric power.

1. Wires must have sufficient mechanical strength to 
allow for service conditions.

2. Allowable power loss (I2 R loss) in the line represents 
electrical energy converted into heat. The use of large 
conductors reduces the resistance and therefore the I2 
R loss. However, large conductors are more expensive, 
heavier, and need more substantial support.

3. If the source maintains a constant voltage at the input 
to the lines, any variation in the load on the line causes 
a variation in line current and a consequent variation 
in the IR drop in the line. A wide variation in the IR 
drop in the line causes poor voltage regulation at the 
load. The obvious remedy is to reduce either current 
or resistance. A reduction in load current lowers 
the amount of power being transmitted, whereas a 
reduction in line resistance increases the size and 
weight of conductors required. A compromise is 
generally reached whereby the voltage variation at 
the load is within tolerable limits and the weight of 
line conductors is not excessive.

4. When current is drawn through the conductor, heat is 
generated. The temperature of the wire rises until the 
heat radiated, or otherwise dissipated, is equal to the 
heat generated by the passage of current through the 
line. If the conductor is insulated, the heat generated 
in the conductor is not so readily removed as it 
would be if the conductor were not insulated. Thus, 
to protect the insulation from too much heat, the 
current through the conductor must be maintained 
below a certain value. When electrical conductors are 
installed in locations where the ambient temperature 
is relatively high, the heat generated by external 
sources constitutes an appreciable part of the total 
conductor heating. Allowance must be made for 
the influence of external heating on the allowable 
conductor current, and each case has its own specific 
limitations. The maximum allowable operating 
temperature of insulated conductors varies with the 
type of conductor insulation being used.

If it is desirable to use wire sizes smaller than #20, particular 
attention should be given to the mechanical strength and 
installation handling of these wires (e.g., vibration, flexing, 
and termination). Wires containing less than 19 strands 
must not be used. Consideration should be given to the use 
of high-strength alloy conductors in small-gauge wires to 
increase mechanical strength. As a general practice, wires 
smaller than size #20 should be provided with additional 
clamps and be grouped with at least three other wires. They 
should also have additional support at terminations, such 
as connector grommets, strain relief clamps, shrinkable 
sleeving, or telescoping bushings. They should not be used in 


9-70

0000

000

00

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

460.0

410.0

365.0

325.0

289.0

258.0

229.0

204.0

182.0

162.0

144.0

128.0

114.0

102.0

91.0

81.0

72.0

64.0

57.0

51.0

45.0

40.0

36.0

32.0

28.5

25.3

22.6

20.1

17.9

15.9

14.2

12.6

11.3

10.0

8.9

8.0

7.1

6.3

5.6

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.1

212,000.0

168,000.0

133,000.0

106,000.0

83,700.0

66,400.0

52,600.0

41,700.0

33,100.0

26,300.0

20,800.0

16,500.0

13,100.0

10,400.0

8,230.0

6,530.0

5,180.0

4,110.0

3,260.0

2,580.0

2,050.0

1,620.0

1,290.0

1,020.0

810.0

642.0

509.0

404.0

320.0

254.0

202.0

160.0

127.0

101.0

79.7

63.2

50.1

39.8

31.5

25.0

19.8

15.7

12.5

9.9

0.166

0.132

0.105

0.0829

0.0657

0.0521

0.0413

0.0328

0.0260

0.0206

0.0164

0.0130

0.0103

0.00815

0.00647

0.00513

0.00407

0.00323

0.00256

0.00203

0.00161

0.00128

0.00101

0.000802

0.000636

0.000505

0.000400

0.000317

0.000252

0.000200

0.000158

0.000126

0.0000995

0.0000789

0.0000626

0.0000496

0.0000394

0.0000312

0.0000248

0.0000196

0.0000156

0.0000123

0.0000098

0.0000078

0.0500

0.0630

0.0795

0.100  

0.126  

0.159  

0.201  

0.253  

0.319  

0.403  

0.508  

0.641  

0.808  

1.02    

1.28    

1.62    

2.04    

2.58    

3.25    

4.09    

5.16    

6.51    

8.21    

10.40    

13.10    

16.50    

20.80    

26.20    

33.00    

41.60    

52.50    

66.20    

83.40    

105.00    

133.00    

167.00    

211.00    

266.00    

335.00    

423.00    

533.00    

673.00    

848.00    

1,070.00    

0.0577

0.0727

0.0917

0.166  

0.146  

0.184  

0.232  

0.292  

0.369  

0.465  

0.586  

0.739  

0.932  

1.18    

1.48    

1.87    

2.36    

2.97    

3.75    

4.73    

5.96    

7.51    

9.48    

11.90    

15.10    

19.00    

24.00    

30.20    

38.10    

48.00    

60.60    

76.40    

96.30    

121.00    

153.00    

193.00    

243.00    

307.00    

387.00    

488.00    

616.00    

776.00    

979.00    

1,230.00    

Gauge Number Diameter (mils) Circular (mils) Square inches 25 °C (77 °F) 65 °C (149 °F)

Cross Section Ohms per 1,000 ft

Figure 9-115. American wire gauge for standard annealed solid copper wire. 


9-71

applications where they are subjected to excessive vibration, 
repeated bending, or frequent disconnection from screw 
termination. [Figure 9-116]

Current Carrying Capacity
In some instances, the wire may be capable of carrying more 
current than is recommended for the contacts of the related 
connector. In this instance, it is the contact rating that dictates 
the maximum current to be carried by a wire. Wires of larger 
gauge may need to be used to fit within the crimp range of 
connector contacts that are adequately rated for the current 
being carried. Figure 9-117 gives a family of curves whereby 
the bundle derating factor may be obtained.

Maximum Operating Temperature

The current that causes a temperature steady state condition 
equal to the rated temperature of the wire should not be 
exceeded. Rated temperature of the wire may be based 
upon the ability of either the conductor or the insulation to 
withstand continuous operation without degradation.

1. Single Wire in Free Air
Determining a wiring system’s current-carrying capacity 
begins with determining the maximum current that a 
given-sized wire can carry without exceeding the allowable 
temperature difference (wire rating minus ambient °C). 
The curves are based upon a single copper wire in free air. 
[Figure 9-117]

2. Wires in a Harness
When wires are bundled into harnesses, the current derived 
for a single wire must be reduced, as shown in Figure 9-118. 
The amount of current derating is a function of the number 
of wires in the bundle and the percentage of the total wire 
bundle capacity that is being used. 

3. Harness at Altitude 
Since heat loss from the bundle is reduced with increased 
altitude, the amount of current should be derated. 
Figure 9-119 gives a curve whereby the altitude-derating 
factor may be obtained.

4. Aluminum Conductor Wire
When aluminum conductor wire is used, sizes should be 
selected on the basis of current ratings shown in Figure 9-120. 
The use of sizes smaller than #8 is discouraged. Aluminum 
wire should not be attached to engine mounted accessories 
or used in areas having corrosive fumes, severe vibration, 
mechanical stresses, or where there is a need for frequent 
disconnection. Use of aluminum wire is also discouraged 
for runs of less than 3 feet. Termination hardware should 
be of the type specifically designed for use with aluminum 
conductor wiring. 

Computing Current Carrying Capacity

The following section presents some examples on how to 
calculate the load carrying capacity of aircraft electrical 
wire. The calculation is a step by step approach and several 
graphs are used to obtain information to compute the current 
carrying capacity of a particular wire.

Example 1
Assume a harness (open or braided) consisting of 10 wires, 
size 20, 200 °C rated copper, and 25 wires size 22, 200 °C 
rated copper, is installed in an area where the ambient 
temperature is 60 °C and the aircraft is capable of operating 
at a 35,000 foot altitude. Circuit analysis reveals that 7 of the 
35 wires in the bundle (7⁄35 = 20 percent) are carrying power 
currents near or up to capacity.

Step 1—Refer to the single wire in free air curves in 
Figure 9-114. Determine the change of temperature of the wire 
to determine free air ratings. Since the wire is in an ambient 
temperature of 60 °C and rated at 200 °C, the change of the 
temperature is 200 °C – 60 °C = 140 °C. Follow the 140 °C 
temperature difference horizontally until it intersects with 
wire size line on Figure 9-113. The free air rating for size 20 
is 21.5 amps, and the free air rating for size 22 is 16.2 amps.

Step 2—Refer to the bundle derating curves in Figure 9-118. 
The 20 percent curve is selected since circuit analysis indicate 
that 20 percent or less of the wire in the harness would be 
carrying power currents and less than 20 percent of the bundle 
capacity would be used. Find 35 (on the horizontal axis), since 
there are 35 wires in the bundle, and determine a derating 
factor of 0.52 (on the vertical axis) from the 20 percent curve.

Step 3—Derate the size 22 free air rating by multiplying 16.2 
by 0.52 to get 8.4 amps in harness rating. Derate the size 20 
free air rating by multiplying 21.5 by 0.52 to get 11.2 amps 
in-harness rating.

Step 4—Refer to the altitude derating curve of Figure 9-119.
Look for 35,000 feet (on the horizontal axis) since that is the 
altitude at which the aircraft is operating. Note that the wire 
must be derated by a factor of 0.86 (found on the vertical 
axis). Derate the size 22 harness rating by multiplying 8.4 
amps by 0.86 to get 7.2 amps. Derate the size 20 harness 
rating by multiplying 11.2 amps by 0.86 to get 9.6 amps.

Step 5—To find the total harness capacity, multiply the 
total number of size 22 wires by the derated capacity 
(25 × 7.2 = 180.0 amps) and add to that the number of size 20 
wires multiplied by the derated capacity (10 × 9.6  = 96.8 amps) 
and multiply the sum by the 20 percent harness capacity factor. 
Thus, the total harness capacity is (180.0 + 96.0) × 0.20  = 55.2 
amps. It has been determined that the total harness  


9-72

NOTE
Length (LI) is based on conductor temperature of 20 °C. 
To determine length (L2) at a higher conductor temperature, 
use formula in which T2 = estimated conductor temperature °C.
             Voltage drop example B

WIRE SIZE
Voltage drop chart
Continuous flow at 20°
Tin-plated MIL-W-27759 conductor 

VOLTAGE DROP

CONTINUOUS
CIRCUIT

VOLTAGE

200

700
630
560
490
420

350

280

210

175

140

112
98

84

63
56
49
42

35

7

115

800

600

400
360
320
280
240

200

160

120

100

80

64
56

48

36
32
28
24

20

4 

14

100

75

50
45
40
35
30

25

20

15

12

10

8
7

6

4

3

2

0.5  

28

200

150

100
90
80
70
60

50

40

30

25

20

16
14

12

9
8
7
6

5

1 

W
ir
e
 le

n
g
th

 (
ft
)

24           22            20          18   16           14         12           10                  8           6              4            2     1    1/0   2/0  3/0   4/0

1            1.5      2              3     4       5      7     10          15        20        30            50      70

100

150

200

300

L2 =
(254.5) (L1)
(234.5) + (T2)

AMPERES

VOLTAGE DROP

CIRCUIT
VOLTAGE

200

1400
1260
1120

980
840

700

560

420

350

280

224
196

168

126
112

98
84.

70

14

115

1600

1200

800
720
640
560
480

400

320

240

200

160

128
112

96

72
64
56
48

40

8 

14

200

150

100
90
80
70
60

50

40

30

24

20

16
14

12

8

6

4

1   

28

400

300

200
180
160
140
120

100

80

60

50

40

32
28

24

18
16
14
12

10

2 

W
ir
e
 le

n
g
th

 (
ft
)

24           22            20          18   16           14         12           10                 8           6              4            2     1    1/0   2/0  3/0   4/0

1            1.5      2              3     4       5      7     10          15        20        30            50      70

100

150

200

300

Example 1
Example 2
Voltage drop example A

WIRE SIZE

}
No. 8 wire at 20 amps
No. 12 wire at 20 amps
No. 14 wire at 20 amps

Figure 9-116. Conductor chart, continuous (top) and intermittent flow (bottom). 


9-73

T
em

p
er

at
u

re
 d

if
fe

re
n

ce
 (

w
ir

e 
ra

ti
n

g
 m

in
u

s 
th

e 
am

b
ie

n
t 

°C
)

4            5        6       7      8     9    10                                     20                    30              40         50       60      70   80   90 100

300

200

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

1

Wire size 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10

1

T
em

p
er

at
u

re
 d

if
fe

re
n

ce
 (

w
ir

e 
ra

ti
n

g
 m

in
u

s 
th

e 
am

b
ie

n
t 

°C
)

40            50        60      70     80    90  100                                         200                      300             400         500       600     700   800   900 1000

300

200

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

Current Amperes

Wire size 8 6 4 1 1/0 2/0 3/0 4/02

NOT TO BE USED 
AS SINGLE WIRE

1

Figure 9-117. Single copper wire in free air.


9-74

C
u

rr
en

t 
d

er
at

in
g

 f
ac

to
r

1          3        5        7        9       11       13       15       17      19      21      23      25       27       29      31      33      35       37       39       41

1.00

0.90

0.80

0.70

0.60

0.50

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0

Number of wires in bundle

Bundle loading percent 20
40

60 80
100

C
u

rr
en

t 
d

er
at

in
g

 f
ac

to
r

0                    10                 20                  30                  40                  50                 60                  70                  80                 90                100

1.00

0.95

0.90

0.85

0.80

0.75

0.70

Altitude (x1,000 feet)

Figure 9-118. Bundle derating curve.

Figure 9-119. Altitude derating curve.


9-75

#8

#6

#4

#2

#1

#0

#00

#000

#0000

30

40

54

76

90

102

117

138

163

45

61

82

113

133

153

178

209

248

1.093

0.641

0.427

0.268

0.214

0.169

0.133

0.109

0.085

 Wire
size

Continuous duty current 
(amp) wires in bundles, groups, 

or harnesses or conduits 

Max.
resistance 

ohms/1000 feet

Wire conductor temperature rating

@ 105 °C @ 150 °C @ 20 °C

 Nominal system
voltage

 Allowable voltage
drop during 

continuous operation
 Intermittent
operation

14

28

115

200

1

2

8

14

 0.5

1

4

7

Figure 9-120. Current-carrying capacity and resistance of 
aluminum wire.

Figure 9-121. Tabulation chart (allowable voltage drop between 
bus and utilization equipment ground).

current should not exceed 55.2 A, size 22 wire should not 
carry more than 7.2 amps and size 20 wire should not carry 
more than 9.6 amps.

Step 6—Determine the actual circuit current for each wire in 
the bundle and for the whole bundle. If the values calculated 
in step 5 are exceeded, select the next larger size wire and 
repeat the calculations.

Example 2
Assume a harness (open or braided), consisting of 12 size 
12, 200 °C rated copper wires, is operated in an ambient 
temperature of 25 °C at sea level and 60 °C at a 20,000-
foot altitude. All 12 wires are operated at or near their  
maximum capacity.

Step 1—Refer to the single wire in free air curve in 
Figure 9-117, determine the temperature difference of the 
wire to determine free air ratings. Since the wire is in ambient 
temperature of 25 °C and 60 °C and is rated at 200 °C, the 
temperature differences are 200 °C – 25 °C = 175 °C and 
200 °C – 60 °C = 140 °C, respectively. Follow the 175 °C 
and the 140 °C temperature difference lines on Figure 9-116 
until each intersects wire size line. The free air ratings of size 
12 are 68 amps and 59 amps, respectively.

Step 2—Refer to the bundling derating curves in Figure 9-118. 
The 100 percent curve is selected because we know all 12 
wires are carrying full load. Find 12 (on the horizontal 
axis) since there are 12 wires in the bundle and determine 
a derating factor of 0.43 (on the vertical axis) from the 100 
percent curve.

Step 3—Derate the size #12 free air ratings by multiplying 
68 amps and 61 amps by 0.43 to get 29.2 amps and 25.4 
amps, respectively.

Step 4—Refer to the altitude derating curve of Figure 9-119, 
look for sea level and 20,000 feet (on the horizontal axis) 
since these are the conditions at which the load is carried. The 
wire must be derated by a factor of 1.0 and 0.91, respectively.

Step 5—Derate the size 12 in a bundle ratings by multiplying 
29.2 amps at sea level and 25.4 amps at 20,000 feet by 1.0 
and 0.91, respectively to obtain 29.2 amps and 23.1 amps. 
The total bundle capacity at sea level and 25 °C ambient 
temperature is 29.2 × 12 = 350.4 amps. At 20,000 feet 
and 60 °C ambient temperature, the bundle capacity is 
23.1 × 12 = 277.2 amps. Each size 12 wire can carry 29.2 
amps at sea level, 25 °C ambient temperature or 23.1 amps 
at 20,000 feet and 60 °C ambient temperature.

Step 6—Determine the actual circuit current for each wire 
in the bundle and for the bundle. If the values calculated 
in Step 5 are exceeded, select the next larger size wire and 
repeat the calculations.

Allowable Voltage Drop
The voltage drop in the main power wires from the generation 
source or the battery to the bus should not exceed 2 percent 
of the regulated voltage when the generator is carrying rated 
current or the battery is being discharged at the 5-minute rate. 
The tabulation shown in Figure 9-121 defines the maximum 
acceptable voltage drop in the load circuits between the bus 
and the utilization equipment ground. 

The resistance of the current return path through the aircraft 
structure is generally considered negligible. However, this 
is based on the assumption that adequate bonding to the 
structure or a special electric current return path has been 
provided that is capable of carrying the required electric 
current with a negligible voltage drop. To determine circuit 
resistance, check the voltage drop across the circuit. If the 
voltage drop does not exceed the limit established by the 
aircraft or product manufacturer, the resistance value for 
the circuit may be considered satisfactory. When checking a 
circuit, the input voltage should be maintained at a constant 
value. Figures 9-122 and 9-123 show formulas that may be 
used to determine electrical resistance in wires and some 
typical examples. 


9-76

107

90

88

100

20

20

20

20

No. 6

No. 4

No. 12

No. 14

VD = (0.00044 ohms/feet)

(107 x 20) = 0.942

VD = (0.00028 ohms/feet)

(90 x 20) = 0.504

VD = (0.00202 ohms/feet)

(88 x 20) = 3.60

VD = (0.00306 ohms/feet)

(100 x 20) = 6.12

1



0.5

4

7

 Voltage
drop

 Run
lengths
(feet)

Circuit
current
(amps)

 Wire
size
from
chart

Check calculated
voltage drop (VD)
= (resistance/feet)
(length) (current)

No. 10

---

---

---

20  39

 19.5

156

273

VD = (0.00126 ohms/feet)

(39 x 20) = 0.98

VD = (0.00126 ohms/feet)

(19.5 x 20) = 0.366

VD = (0.00126 ohms/feet)

(156 x 20) = 3.93

VD = (0.00126 ohms/feet)

(273 x 20) = 6.88

1



0.5

4

7

 Maximum
Voltage

drop
Wire
size

Circuit
current
(amps)

 Maximum
wire run
length
(feet)

Check calculated
voltage drop (VD)
= (resistance/feet)
(length) (current)

Figure 9-122. Determining required tin-plated copper wire size and 
checking voltage drop. 

Figure 9-123. Determining maximum tin-plated copper wire length 
and checking voltage drop.

The following formula can be used to check the voltage 
drop. The resistance/ft can be found in Figures 9-122 and 
9-123 for the wire size.

Calculated voltage drop (VD) = resistance/ft × length × 
current

Electric Wire Chart Instructions

To select the correct size of electrical wire, two major 
requirements must be met:

1. The wire size should be sufficient to prevent an 
excessive voltage drop while carrying the required 
current over the required distance. [Figure 9-121]

2. The size should be sufficient to prevent overheating of 
the wire carrying the required current. (See Maximum 
Operating Temperature earlier in this chapter for 
computing current carrying capacity methods.)

To meet the two requirements for selecting the correct wire 
size using Figure 9-116, the following must be known:

1. The wire length in feet.

2. The number of amperes of current to be carried.

3. The allowable voltage drop permitted.

4. The required continuous or intermittent current.

5. The estimated or measured conductor temperature.

6. Is the wire to be installed in conduit and/or bundle?

7. Is the wire to be installed as a single wire in free air?

Example A. 
Find the wire size in Figure 9-116 using the following known 
information:

1. The wire run is 50 feet long, including the ground 
wire.

2. Current load is 20 amps.

3. The voltage source is 28 volts from bus to equipment.

4. The circuit has continuous operation.

5. Estimated conductor temperature is 20 °C or less. The 
scale on the left of the chart represents maximum wire 
length in feet to prevent an excessive voltage drop for 
a specified voltage source system (e.g., 14V, 28V, 
115V, 200V). This voltage is identified at the top of 
scale and the corresponding voltage drop limit for 
continuous operation at the bottom. The scale (slant 
lines) on top of the chart represents amperes. The scale 
at the bottom of the chart represents wire gauge.

Step 1—From the left scale, find the wire length 50 feet under 
the 28V source column.

Step 2—Follow the corresponding horizontal line to the right 
until it intersects the slanted line for the 20-amp load.

Step 3—At this point, drop vertically to the bottom of the 
chart. The value falls between No. 8 and No. 10. Select 
the next larger size wire to the right, in this case No. 8. 
This is the smallest size wire that can be used without 
exceeding the voltage drop limit expressed at the bottom of 
the left scale. This example is plotted on the wire chart in 
Figure 9-116. Use Figure 9-116 (top) for continuous flow 
and Figure 9-116 (bottom) for intermittent flow.

Example B. 
Find the wire size in Figure 9-116 using the following known 
information:

1. The wire run is 200 feet long, including the ground 
wire.


9-77

H215A20 WHITE
H246A20 BLUE H217A20 ORANGE

3 inches max 3 inches max

15 inches max

3 inches max

W

hite

Blue

Or
ang

e

W
hi

te

Bl
ue

Orange

H215A20 H215A20H215A20

3 inches 3 inches15 inches15 inches

A. Multiple wires in a sleeve

B. Single wire without sleeve

Figure 9-124. Wire markings for single wire without sleeve. 

2. Current load is 10 amps.

3. The voltage source is 115 volts from bus to equipment.

4. The circuit has intermittent operation.

Step 1—From the left scale, find the wire length of 200 feet 
under the 115V source column.

Step 2—Follow the corresponding horizontal line to the right 
until it intersects the slanted line for the 10-amp load.

Step 3—At this point, drop vertically to the bottom of the 
chart. The value falls between No. 16 and No. 14. Select the 
next larger size wire to the right—in this case, No. 14. This is 
the smallest size wire that can be used without exceeding the 
voltage drop limit expressed at the bottom of the left scale. 

Wire Identification
The proper identification of electrical wires and cables 
with their circuits and voltages is necessary to provide 
safety of operation, safety to maintenance personnel, and 
ease of maintenance. All wire used on aircraft must have 
its type identification imprinted along its length. It is 
common practice to follow this part number with the five 
digit/letter Commercial and Government Entity (CAGE) 
code identifying the wire manufacturer. You can identify 
the performance capabilities of existing installed wire you 
need to replace, and avoid the inadvertent use of a lower 
performance and unsuitable replacement wire. 

Placement of Identification Markings
Identification markings should be placed at each end of the 
wire and at 15-inch maximum intervals along the length 
of the wire. Wires less than 3 inches in length need not be 

identified. Wires 3 to 7 inches in length should be identified 
approximately at the center. Added identification marker 
sleeves should be located so that ties, clamps, or supporting 
devices need not be removed to read the identification. The 
wire identification code must be printed to read horizontally 
(from left to right) or vertically (from top to bottom). The two 
methods of marking wire or cable are as follows:

1. Direct marking is accomplished by printing the cable’s 
outer covering. [Figure 9-124B]

2. Indirect marking is accomplished by printing a heat-
shrinkable sleeve and installing the printed sleeve on 
the wire or cables outer covering. Indirectly-marked 
wire or cable should be identified with printed 
sleeves at each end and at intervals not longer than 
6 feet. [Figure 9-125] The individual wires inside 
a cable should be identified within 3 inches of their 
termination. [Figure 9-124A]

Types of Wire Markings 
The preferred method is to mark directly on the wire without 
causing insulation degradation. Teflon-coated wires, shielded 
wiring, multiconductor cable, and thermocouple wires 
usually require special sleeves to carry identification marks. 
There are some special wire marking machines available that 
can be used to stamp directly on the type wires mentioned 
above. Whatever method of marking is used, the marking 
should be legible and the color should contrast with the wire 
insulation or sleeve.

Several different methods can be used to mark directly on 
the wire: hot stamp marking, ink jet printers, and laser jet 
printers. [Figure 9-126] The hot stamp method can damage 
the insulation of a newer type of wire that utilizes thin  


9-78

24

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

1

0

00

000

0000



8

6

4

2

1

0

00

000

0000

 Wire size Sleeving size

AN # AL # No.    Nominal ID (inch)

 12

 11

 10

  9

  8

  7

  6

  4

  2

  0
  3/8 inch
  1/2 inch
  1/2 inch
  5/8 inch
  5/8 inch
  3/4 inch
  3/4 inch

0.085

0.095

0.106

0.118

0.113

0.148

0.166

0.208

0.263

0.330

0.375

0.500

0.500

0.625

0.625

0.750

0.750

H215A20 H215A20 H215A20

3 inches 6
 f
t

6
 f
t

3 inches

Figure 9-125. Spacing of printed identification marks (indirect 
marking). 

Figure 9-126. Laser wire printer.

Figure 9-127. Alternate method of identifying wire bundles.
Figure 9-128. Recommended size of identification sleeving.

insulators. Fracture of the insulation wall and penetration to 
the conductor of these materials by the stamping dies have 
occurred. Later in service, when these openings have been 
wetted by various fluids or moisture, serious arcing and 
surface tracking have damaged wire bundles.

Identification sleeves can be used if the direct marking on 
the wire is not possible. [Figure 9-127]

Flexible sleeving, either clear or opaque, is satisfactory for 
general use. When color-coded or striped component wire is 

used as part of a cable, the identification sleeve should specify 
which color is associated with each wire identification code. 
Identification sleeves are normally used for identifying the 
following types of wire or cable: unjacketed shielded wire, 
thermocouple wire, coaxial cable, multiconductor cable, 
and high temperature wire. In most cases, identification tape 
can be used in place of sleeving. For sleeving exposed to 
high temperatures (over 400 °F), materials, such as silicone 
fiberglass, should be used. Polyolefin sleeving should be used 
in areas where resistance to solvent and synthetic hydraulic 
fluids is necessary. Sleeves may be secured in place with 
cable ties or by heat shrinking. The identification sleeving 
for various sizes of wire is shown in Figure 9-128.

Wire Installation and Routing
Open Wiring
Interconnecting wire is used in point-to-point open harnesses, 
normally in the interior or pressurized fuselage, with each 
wire providing enough insulation to resist damage from 
handling and service exposure. Electrical wiring is often 
installed in aircraft without special enclosing means. This 
practice is known as open wiring and offers the advantages 
of ease of maintenance and reduced weight.

Wire Groups and Bundles and Routing
Wires are often installed in bundles to create a more organized 
installation. These wire bundles are often called wire 
harnesses. Wire harnesses are often made in the factory or 


9-79

1/2" maximum with normal hand pressure

Figure 9-129. Cable harness jig board.

Figure 9-130. Slack between supports of a cable harness.

electrical shop on a jig board so that the wire bundles could be 
preformed to fit into the aircraft. [Figure 9-129] As a result, 
each harness for a particular aircraft installation is identical in 
shape and length. The wiring harness could be covered by a 
shielding (metal braid) to avoid EMI. Grouping or bundling 
certain wires, such as electrically unprotected power wiring 
and wiring going to duplicate vital equipment, should be 
avoided. Wire bundles should generally be less than 75 wires, 
or 11⁄2 to 2 inches in diameter where practicable. When several 
wires are grouped at junction boxes, terminal blocks, panels, 
etc., identity of the groups within a bundle can be retained.



Slack in Wire Bundles

Wiring should be installed with sufficient slack so that 
bundles and individual wires are not under tension. Wires 
connected to movable or shock-mounted equipment should 
have sufficient length to allow full travel without tension 
on the bundle. Wiring at terminal lugs or connectors should 
have sufficient slack to allow two reterminations without 
replacement of wires. This slack should be in addition to 
the drip loop and the allowance for movable equipment. 
Normally, wire groups or bundles should not exceed 1⁄2 inch 
deflection between support points. [Figure 9-130] This 
measurement may be exceeded if there is no possibility of 
the wire group or bundle touching a surface that may cause 
abrasion. Sufficient slack should be provided at each end to 
permit replacement of terminals and ease of maintenance; 
prevent mechanical strain on the wires, cables, junctions, 
and supports; permit free movement of shock- and vibration-
mounted equipment; and allow shifting of equipment, as 
necessary, to perform alignment, servicing, tuning, removal 
of dust covers, and changing of internal components while 
installed in aircraft.

Twisting Wires

When specified on the engineering drawing, or when 
accomplished as a local practice, parallel wires must 
sometimes be twisted. The following are the most  
common examples:

1. Wiring in the vicinity of magnetic compass or flux 
valve

2. Three-phase distribution wiring

3. Certain other wires (usually radio wiring) as specified 
on engineering drawings

Twist the wires so they lie snugly against each other, making 
approximately the number of twists per foot as shown in 
Figure 9-131. Always check wire insulation for damage after 
twisting. If the insulation is torn or frayed, replace the wire.

 


9-80

 22 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4Gauge #

10 10 9 8 7 1/2 7 6 1/2 6 5 4

10 10 8 1/2 7 6 1/2 6 5 1/2 5 4 3

2 Wires

3 Wires

Figure 9-131. Recommended number of wire twists per foot.

Figure 9-132. Staggered splices in wire bundle.

Spliced Connections in Wire Bundles

Splicing is permitted on wiring as long as it does not affect 
the reliability and the electromechanical characteristics of 
the wiring. Splicing of power wires, coaxial cables, multiplex 
bus, and large-gauge wire must have approved data. Splicing 
of electrical wire should be kept to a minimum and avoided 
entirely in locations subject to extreme vibrations. Splicing 
of individual wires in a group or bundle should have 
engineering approval, and the splice(s) should be located 
to allow periodic inspection.

Many types of aircraft splice connector are available for 
use when splicing individual wires. Use of a self-insulated 
splice connector is preferred; however, a non-insulated 
splice connector may be used provided the splice is 
covered with plastic sleeving that is secured at both ends. 
Environmentally sealed splices that conform to MIL-T-7928 
provide a reliable means of splicing in SWAMP areas. 
However, a non-insulated splice connector may be used, 
provided the splice is covered with dual-wall shrink sleeving 
of a suitable material.

There should be no more than one splice in any one wire 
segment between any two connectors or other disconnect 
points. Exceptions include when attaching to the spare 
pigtail lead of a potted connector, when splicing multiple 
wires to a single wire, when adjusting wire size to fit 
connector contact crimp barrel size, and when required to 
make an approved repair. 

Splices in bundles must be staggered to minimize any 
increase in the size of the bundle, preventing the bundle from 
fitting into its designated space or causing congestion that 
adversely affects maintenance. [Figure 9-132]

Splices should not be used within 12 inches of a termination 

device, except when attaching to the pigtail spare lead of a 
potted termination device, to splice multiple wires to a single 
wire, or to adjust the wire sizes so that they are compatible 
with the contact crimp barrel sizes.

Bend Radii

The minimum radius of bends in wire groups or bundles must 
not be less than 10 times the outside diameter of the largest wire 
or cable, except that at the terminal strips where wires break 
out at terminations or reverse direction in a bundle. Where 
the wire is suitably supported, the radius may be three times 
the diameter of the wire or cable. Where it is not practical to 
install wiring or cables within the radius requirements, the 
bend should be enclosed in insulating tubing. The radius for 
thermocouple wire should be done in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s recommendation and shall be sufficient to 
avoid excess losses or damage to the cable. Ensure that RF 
cables (e.g., coaxial and triaxial) are bent at a radius of no less 
than six times the outside diameter of the cable.

Protection Against Chafing

Wires and wire groups should be protected against chafing or 
abrasion in those locations where contact with sharp surfaces 
or other wires would damage the insulation, or chafing could 
occur against the airframe or other components. Damage 
to the insulation can cause short circuits, malfunction, or 
inadvertent operation of equipment. 

Protection Against High Temperature

Wiring must be routed away from high-temperature 
equipment and lines to prevent deterioration of insulation. 
Wires must be rated so the conductor temperature remains 
within the wire specification maximum when the ambient 
temperature and heat rise related to current-carrying capacity 
are taken into account. The residual heating effects caused by 
exposure to sunlight when aircraft are parked for extended 
periods should also be taken into account. Wires, such as 
those used in fire detection, fire extinguishing, fuel shutoff, 
and fly-by-wire flight control systems that must operate 
during and after a fire, must be selected from types that are 
qualified to provide circuit integrity after exposure to fire for 


9-81

Figure 9-133. Positive separation of wire and fluid lines and  
wire clamps.

Figure 9-134. Drip loop.

a specified period. Wire insulation deteriorates rapidly when 
subjected to high temperatures. 

Separate wires from high-temperature equipment, such as 
resistors, exhaust stacks, heating ducts, to prevent insulation 
breakdown. Insulate wires that must run through hot areas 
with a high-temperature insulation material, such as fiberglass 
or PTFE. Avoid high-temperature areas when using cables 
with soft plastic insulation, such as polyethylene, because 
these materials are subject to deterioration and deformation 
at elevated temperatures. Many coaxial cables have this type 
of insulation.

Protection Against Solvents and Fluids

An arcing fault between an electrical wire and a metallic 
flammable fluid line may puncture the line and result in a fire. 
Every effort must be made to avoid this hazard by physical 
separation of the wire from lines and equipment containing 
oxygen, oil, fuel, hydraulic fluid, or alcohol. Wiring must 
be routed above these lines and equipment with a minimum 
separation of 6 inches or more whenever possible. When such 
an arrangement is not practicable, wiring must be routed so 
that it does not run parallel to the fluid lines. A minimum of 
2 inches must be maintained between wiring and such lines 
and equipment, except when the wiring is positively clamped 
to maintain at least 1⁄2-inch separation, or when it must be 
connected directly to the fluid-carrying equipment. Install 
clamps as shown in Figure 9-133. These clamps should not 
be used as a means of supporting the wire bundle. Additional 
clamps should be installed to support the wire bundle and 
the clamps fastened to the same structure used to support the 
fluid line(s) to prevent relative motion.
Wires, or groups of wires, should enter a junction  box, or 

terminate at a piece of equipment in an upward direction 
where practicable. Ensure that a trap, or drip loop, is provided 
to prevent fluids or condensation from running into wire or 
cable ends that slope downward toward a connector, terminal 
block, panel, or junction block. A drip loop is an area where 
the wire(s) are made to travel downward and then up to the 
connector. [Figure 9-134] Fluids and moisture will flow 
along the wires to the bottom of the loop and be trapped there 
to drip or evaporate without affecting electrical conductivity 
in the wire, junction, or connected device.

Where wires must be routed downwards to a junction box 
or electrical unit and a drip loop is not possible, the entrance 
should be sealed according to manufacturer’s specifications 
to prevent moisture from entering the box/unit. Wires and 
cables installed in bilges and other locations where fluids 
collect must  be routed as far from the lowest point as possible 
or otherwise be provided with a moisture-proof covering.

Protection of Wires in Wheel Well Areas

Wires located on landing gear and in the wheel well area 
can be exposed to many hazardous conditions if not suitably 
protected. Where wire bundles pass flex points, there must not 
be any strain on attachments or excessive slack when parts 
are fully extended or retracted. The wiring and protective 
tubing must be inspected frequently and replaced at the first 
sign of wear.

Wires should be routed so that fluids drain away from the 
connectors. When this is not practicable, connectors must be 
potted. Wiring which must be routed in wheel wells or other 
external areas must be given extra protection in the form of 
harness jacketing and connector strain relief. Conduits or 
flexible sleeving used to protect wiring must be equipped 
with drain holes to prevent entrapment of moisture.


9-82

Lockwasher external teethSplit lockwasher Self-locking nut Nut

Plain washersPlain washer

Bolt

Cable clamps

Dangerous angles

Safe angles

45° max 45° 
ma

x

Figure 9-135. Wire clamps.

Figure 9-136. Safe angle for cable clamps. 

Figure 9-137. Typical mounting hardware for MS-21919 cable clamps.

The technician should check during inspections that wires 
and cables are adequately protected in wheel wells and other 
areas where they may be exposed to damage from impact of 
rocks, ice, mud, etc. (If rerouting of wires or cables is not 
practical, protective jacketing may be installed). This type 
of installation must be held to a minimum.

Clamp Installation

Wires and wire bundles must be supported by clamps or 
plastic cable straps. [Figure 9-135] Clamps and other primary 
support devices must be constructed of materials that are 
compatible with their installation and environment, in terms 
of temperature, fluid resistance, exposure to ultraviolet (UV) 
light, and wire bundle mechanical loads. They should be 
spaced at intervals not exceeding 24 inches. Clamps on wire 
bundles should be selected so that they have a snug fit without 
pinching wires [Figures 9-136 through 9-138]

Caution: The use of metal clamps on coaxial RF cables may 
cause problems, if clamp fit is such that RF cable’s original 
cross section is distorted.

Clamps on wire bundles should not allow the bundle to 
move through the clamp when a slight axial pull is applied. 
Clamps on RF cables must fit without crushing and must 
be snug enough to prevent the cable from moving freely 
through the clamp, but may allow the cable to slide through 
the clamp when a light axial pull is applied. The cable or wire 
bundle may be wrapped with one or more turns of electrical 
tape when required to achieve this fit. Plastic clamps or 
cable ties must not be used where their failure could result 
in interference with movable controls, wire bundle contact 
with movable equipment, or chafing damage to essential or 
unprotected wiring. They must not be used on vertical runs 
where inadvertent slack migration could result in chafing or 
other damage. Clamps must be installed with their attachment 
hardware positioned above them, wherever practicable, so 
that they are unlikely to rotate as the result of wire bundle 
weight or wire bundle chafing. [Figure 9-136]


9-83

Wire is pinched in clamp

“Z” member“Angle” member

Cable clamps

Angle bracket

Incorrect

Correct

Figure 9-138. Installing cable clamp to structure.

Clamps lined with nonmetallic material should be used to 
support the wire bundle along the run. Tying may be used 
between clamps, but should not be considered as a substitute 
for adequate clamping. Adhesive tapes are subject to age 
deterioration and, therefore, are not acceptable as a clamping 
means. [Figure 9-137]

The back of the clamp, whenever practical, should be rested 
against a structural member. [Figure 9-138] Stand-offs 
should be used to maintain clearance between the wires and 
the structure. Clamps must be installed in such a manner 
that the electrical wires do not come in contact with other 
parts of the aircraft when subjected to vibration. Sufficient 
slack should be left between the last clamp and the electrical 
equipment to prevent strain at the terminal and to minimize 
adverse effects on shock-mounted equipment. Where wires 
or wire bundles pass through bulkheads or other structural 
members, a grommet or suitable clamp should be provided 
to prevent abrasion.

When a wire bundle is clamped into position, if there is less 
than 3⁄8-inch of clearance between the bulkhead cutout and 
the wire bundle, a suitable grommet should be installed as 
indicated in Figure 9-139. The grommet may be cut at a 45° 
angle to facilitate installation, provided it is cemented in place 
and the slot is located at the top of the cutout.

Wire and Cable Clamp Inspection 

Inspect wire and cable clamps for proper tightness. Where 
cables pass through structure or bulkheads, inspect for proper 
clamping and grommets. Inspect for sufficient slack between 
the last clamp and the electronic equipment to prevent strain 
at the cable terminals and to minimize adverse effects on 
shock-mounted equipment. Wires and cables are supported 
by suitable clamps, grommets, or other devices at intervals of 
not more than 24 inches, except when contained in troughs, 

ducts, or conduits. The supporting devices should be of a 
suitable size and type, with the wires and cables held securely 
in place without damage to the insulation.

Use metal stand-offs to maintain clearance between wires and 
structure. Tape or tubing is not acceptable as an alternative to 
stand-offs for maintaining clearance. Install phenolic blocks, 
plastic liners, or rubber grommets in holes, bulkheads, floors, 
or structural members where it is impossible to install off-
angle clamps to maintain wiring separation. In such cases, 
additional protection in the form of plastic or insulating tape 
may be used.

Properly secure clamp retaining bolts so the movement of 
wires and cables is restricted to the span between the points 
of support and not on soldered or mechanical connections at 
terminal posts or connectors.

Movable Controls Wiring Precautions

Clamping of wires routed near movable flight controls 
must be attached with steel hardware and must be spaced 
so that failure of a single attachment point cannot result in 
interference with controls. The minimum separation between 
wiring and movable controls must be at least 1⁄2 inch when 
the bundle is displaced by light hand pressure in the direction 
of the controls.

Conduit
Conduit is manufactured in metallic and nonmetallic 
materials and in both rigid and flexible forms. Primarily, 
its purpose is for mechanical protection of cables or wires. 
Conduit size should be selected for a specific wire bundle 
application to allow for ease in maintenance, and possible 
future circuit expansion, by specifying the conduit inner 
diameter (ID) about 25 percent larger than the maximum 
diameter of the wire bundle. [Figure 9-140]


9-84

Grommet

Wires less than 3/8" from hole edgeClearance 3/8" minimum

A. Cushion clamp at bulkhead hole B. Cushion clamp at bulkhead hole with MS-35489 grommet

Cable clamp MS-21919

Angle bracket with two-point fastening

Angle bracket with two point fastening

Cable clamp MS-21919

C. Cushion clamp at bulkhead hole with MS-21266 grommet

Figure 9-139. Clamping at a bulkhead hole. 

Figure 9-140. Flexible conduit.

Conduit problems can be avoided by following these 
guidelines:

• Do not locate conduit where passengers or maintenance 
personnel might use it as a handhold or footstep.

• Provide drain holes at the lowest point in a conduit 
run. Drilling burrs should be carefully removed.

• Support conduit to prevent chafing against structure 
and to avoid stressing its end fittings.

Rigid Conduit

Damaged conduit sections should be repaired to preclude 
injury to the wires or wire bundle that may consume as much 
as 80 percent of the tube area. Minimum acceptable tube bend 


9-85

 1/8
 3/16
 1/4
 3/8
 1/2
 5/8
 3/4
 1

 11/4
 11/2
 13/4
 2

 3/8
 7/16
 9/16
 15/16
 11/4
 11/2
 13/4
 3

 33/4
 5

 7

 8

 Nominal tube OD (inches) Minimum bend radius (inches)

 3/16
 1/4
 3/8
 1/2
 5/8
 3/4
 1

 11/4
 11/2
 13/4
 2

 21/2

   21/4
   23/4
   33/4
   33/4
   33/4
   41/4
   53/4
  8 

   81/4
  9

   93/4
10

 Nominal ID of 
conduit (inches)

Minimum bending 
radius inside (inches)

Two wires in free air may
couple capacitively, 
resulting in crosstalk.

A charge on the 1st wire
induces an opposite
charge on the 2nd wire.

+ −

Figure 9-141. Minimum bend radii for rigid conduit.

Figure 9-142. Minimum bending radii for flexible aluminum or 
brass conduit. 

Figure 9-143. Crosstalk.

radii for rigid conduit are shown in Figure 9-141. Kinked or 
wrinkled bends in rigid conduits are not recommended and 
should be replaced. Tubing bends that have been flattened 
into an ellipse and have a minor diameter of less than 75 
percent of the nominal tubing diameter should be replaced, 
because the tube area has been reduced by at least 10 percent. 
Tubing that has been formed and cut to final length should be 
deburred to prevent wire insulation damage. When installing 
replacement tube sections with fittings at both ends, care 
should be taken to eliminate mechanical strain.

Flexible Conduit

Flexible aluminum conduit conforming to specification 
MIL-C-6136 is available in two types: Type I, bare flexible 
conduit, and Type II, rubber-covered flexible conduit. Flexible 
brass conduit conforming to specification MIL-C-7931 is 
available and normally used instead of flexible aluminum 
where necessary to minimize radio interference. Also available 
is a plastic flexible tubing. (Reference MIL-T-8191A.) Flexible 
conduit may be used where it is impractical to use rigid conduit, 
such as areas that have motion between conduit ends or where 
complex bends are necessary.

The use of transparent adhesive tape is recommended when 
cutting flexible tubing with a hacksaw to minimize fraying 
of the braid. The tape should be centered over the cutting 
reference mark with the saw cutting through the tape. After 
cutting the flexible conduit, the transparent tape should be 
removed, the frayed braid ends trimmed, burrs removed from 
inside the conduit, and coupling nut and ferrule installed. 
Minimum acceptable bending radii for flexible conduit are 
shown in Figure 9-142.

Wire Shielding
In conventional wiring systems, circuits are shielded 
individually, in pairs, triples, or quads depending on  

each circuit’s shielding requirement called out for in the 
engineering documentation. A wire is normally shielded 
when it is anticipated that the circuit can be affected by 
another circuit in the wire harness. When the wires come 
close together, they can couple enough interference to cause 
a detrimental upset to attached circuitry. This effect is often 
called crosstalk. Wires must come close enough for their 
fields to interact, and they must be in an operating mode 
that produces the crosstalk effect. However, the potential for 
crosstalk is real, and the only way to prevent crosstalk is to 
shield the wire. [Figure 9-143]

Bonding and Grounding

One of the more important factors in the design and 
maintenance of aircraft electrical systems is proper bonding 
and grounding. Inadequate bonding or grounding can lead to 
unreliable operation of systems,  EMI, electrostatic discharge 
damage to sensitive electronics, personnel shock hazard, or 
damage from lightning strike.


9-86

Figure 9-144. Ground wires.

Grounding

Grounding is the process of electrically connecting 
conductive objects to either a conductive structure or some 
other conductive return path for the purpose of safely 
completing either a normal or fault circuit. [Figure 9-144]
If wires carrying return currents from different types of 
sources, such as signals of DC and AC generators, are 
connected to the same ground point or have a common 
connection in the return paths, an interaction of the currents 
occurs. Mixing return currents from various sources should 
be avoided because noise is coupled from one source to 
another and can be a major problem for digital systems. To 
minimize the interaction between various return currents, 
different types of ground should be identified and used. As 
a minimum, the design should use three ground types: (1) 
AC returns, (2) DC returns, and (3) all others.

For distributed power systems, the power return point for an 
alternative power source would be separated. For example, 
in a two-AC generator (one on the right side and the other on 
the left side) system, if the right AC generator were supplying 
backup power to equipment located in the left side, (left 
equipment rack) the backup AC ground return should be 
labeled “AC Right.” The return currents for the left generator 
should be connected to a ground point labeled “AC Left.”

The design of the ground return circuit should be given as 
much attention as the other leads of a circuit. A requirement 
for proper ground connections is that they maintain an 
impedance that is essentially constant. Ground return circuits 
should have a current rating and voltage drop adequate 
for satisfactory operation of the connected electrical and 
electronic equipment. EMI problems that can be caused by a 
system’s power wire can be reduced substantially by locating 
the associated ground return near the origin of the power 
wiring (e.g., circuit breaker panel) and routing the power 
wire and its ground return in a twisted pair. Special care 

should be exercised to ensure replacement on ground return 
leads. The use of numbered insulated wire leads instead of 
bare grounding jumpers may aid in this respect. In general, 
equipment items should have an external ground connection, 
even when internally grounded. Direct connections to a 
magnesium structure must not be used for ground return 
because they may create a fire hazard.

Power ground connections for generators, transformer 
rectifiers, batteries, external power receptacles, and other 
heavy-current loads must be attached to individual grounding 
brackets that are attached to aircraft structure with a proper 
metal-to-metal bonding attachment. This attachment and the 
surrounding structure must provide adequate conductivity 
to accommodate normal and fault currents of the system 
without creating excessive voltage drop or damage to the 
structure. At least three fasteners, located in a triangular or 
rectangular pattern, must be used to secure such brackets in 
order to minimize susceptibility to loosening under vibration. 
If the structure is fabricated of a material, such as carbon fiber 
composite (CFC), that has a higher resistivity than aluminum 
or copper, it is necessary to provide an alternative ground 
path(s) for power return current. Special attention should be 
considered for composite aircraft.

Power return or fault current ground connections within 
flammable vapor areas must be avoided. If they must be 
made, make sure these connections do not arc, spark, or 
overheat under all possible current flow or mechanical failure 
conditions, including induced lightning currents. Criteria for 
inspection and maintenance to ensure continued airworthiness 
throughout the expected life of the aircraft should be 
established. Power return fault currents are normally the 
highest currents flowing in a structure. These can be the full 
generator current capacity. If full generator fault current flows 
through a localized region of the carbon fiber structure, major 
heating and failure can occur. CFC and other similar low-
resistive materials must not be used in power return paths. 
Additional voltage drops in the return path can cause voltage 
regulation problems. Likewise, repeated localized material 
heating by current surges can cause material degradation. 
Both problems may occur without warning and cause no 
repeatable failures or anomalies.

The use of common ground connections for more than one 
circuit or function should be avoided except where it can be 
shown that related malfunctions that could affect more than 
one circuit do not result in a hazardous condition. Even when 
the loss of multiple systems does not, in itself, create a hazard, 
the effect of such failure can be quite distracting to the crew.


9-87

Figure 9-145. Bonding jumpers.

Bonding

Bonding is the electrical connecting of two or more 
conducting objects not otherwise adequately connected.

The following bonding requirements must be considered:

• Equipment bonding—low-impedance paths to 
aircraft structure are normally required for electronic 
equipment to provide radio frequency return circuits 
and for most electrical equipment to facilitate reduction 
in EMI. The cases of components that produce 
electromagnetic energy should be grounded to structure. 
To ensure proper operation of electronic equipment, 
it is particularly important to conform the system’s 
installation specification when interconnections, 
bonding, and grounding are being accomplished.

• Metallic surface bonding—all conducting objects 
on the exterior of the airframe must be electrically 
connected to the airframe through mechanical joints, 
conductive hinges, or bond straps capable of conducting 
static charges and lightning strikes. Exceptions may be 
necessary for some objects, such as antenna elements, 
whose function requires them to be electrically isolated 
from the airframe. Such items should be provided with 
an alternative means to conduct static charges and/or 
lightning currents, as appropriate.

• Static bonds—all isolated conducting parts inside 
and outside the aircraft, having an area greater than 3 
square inches and a linear dimension over 3 inches, 
that are subjected to appreciable electrostatic charging 
due to precipitation, fluid, or air in motion, should 
have a mechanically secure electrical connection to the 
aircraft structure of sufficient conductivity to dissipate 
possible static charges. A resistance of less than 1 ohm 
when clean and dry generally ensures such dissipation 
on larger objects. Higher resistances are permissible 
in connecting smaller objects to airframe structure.

Testing of Bonds and Grounds

The resistance of all bond and ground connections should 
be tested after connections are made before re-finishing. The 
resistance of each connection should normally not exceed 
0.003 ohm. A high quality test instrument, an AN/USM-21A 
or equivalent, is required to accurately measure the very low 
resistance values. 

Bonding Jumper Installation

Bonding jumpers should be made as short as practicable, and 
installed in such a manner that the resistance of each connection 
does not exceed .003 ohm. The jumper should not interfere 
with the operation of movable aircraft elements, such as surface 
controls, nor should normal movement of these elements result 
in damage to the bonding jumper. [Figure 9-145]

• Bonding connections—to ensure a low-resistance 
connection, nonconducting finishes, such as paint 
and anodizing films, should be removed from the 
attachment surface to be contacted by the bonding 
terminal. Electrical wiring should not be grounded 
directly to magnesium parts.

• Corrosion protection—one of the more frequent 
causes of failures in electrical system bonding and 
grounding is corrosion. The areas around completed 
connections should be post-finished quickly with a 
suitable finish coating.

• Corrosion prevention—electrolytic action may 
rapidly corrode a bonding connection if suitable 
precautions are not taken. Aluminum alloy jumpers 
are recommended for most cases; however, copper 
jumpers should be used to bond together parts made 
of stainless steel, cadmium-plated steel, copper, 
brass, or bronze. Where contact between dissimilar 
metals cannot be avoided, the choice of jumper and 
hardware should be such that corrosion is minimized; 
the part likely to corrode should be the jumper or  
associated hardware.

• Bonding jumper attachment—the use of solder to 
attach bonding jumpers should be avoided. Tubular 
members should be bonded by means of clamps to 
which the jumper is attached. Proper choice of clamp 
material should minimize the probability of corrosion.

• Ground return connection—when bonding jumpers 
carry substantial ground return current, the current 
rating of the jumper should be determined to be 
adequate, and a negligible voltage drop is produced. 
[Figure 9-146]


9-88

Structure   Screw or bolt and nut plate   Locknut

Aluminum Terminal and Jumper

Washer A Washer B Washer C

Cadmium-plated
steel or aluminum

Cadmium-plated
steel or aluminum

Cadmium-plated
steel or aluminum

Cadmium-plated
steel or aluminum

None

None or 
magnesium alloy

Cadmium-plated 
steel

Cadmium-plated 
steel

Cadmium-plated 
steel or aluminum

Magnesium-alloy

Cadmium-plated
steel

Corrosion-resisting
steel

Cadmium-plated 
steel

Cadmium-plated 
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Aluminum alloys

Magnesium alloys

Cadmium-plated 
steel

Corrosion-resisting 
steel

Aluminum alloys

Magnesium alloys1

Cadmium-plated 
steel

Corrosion-resisting 
steel 

Cadmium-plated 
steel

Cadmium-plated 
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Corrosion-resisting steel or
Cadmium-plated steel

Tinned Copper Terminal and Jumper

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Corrosion-resisting steel or
cadmium-plated steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Cadmium-plated
steel

Corrosion-resisting
steel

Aluminum alloys2

none

none

1Avoid connecting copper to magnesium.
2Use washers with a conductive finish treated to prevent corrosion, such as AN960JD10L.

Lockwasher

Terminal (limit to 4)

Locknut

Screw or bolt Washer A

Washer B

Washer C

Structure

Figure 9-146. Bolt and nut bonding or grounding to flat surface.

Figure 9-147. Wire lacing. 

Lacing and Tying Wire Bundles
Ties, lacing, and straps are used to secure wire groups or 
bundles to provide ease of maintenance, inspection, and 
installation. Straps may not be used in areas of SWAMP, 
such as wheel wells, near wing flaps, or wing folds. They 
may not be used in high vibration areas where failure of the 
strap would permit wiring to move against parts that could 
damage the insulation and foul mechanical linkages or other 
moving mechanical parts. They also may not be used where 
they could be exposed to UV light, unless the straps are 
resistant to such exposure. [Figure 9-147]

The single cord-lacing method and tying tape may be used 
for wire groups of bundles 1 inch in diameter or less. The 
recommended knot for starting the single cord-lacing method 


9-89

Cord crosses under loop

Starting knot tightened

Trim to 3/8" minimum

Pull here until tight before finishing knot

Final knot

First part of final knot tightenedStep C—Part I

Step C—Part II

Step A—Starting knot

Step B—Intermediate half hitches

Starting knot tightened

Step A—Starting knot bowline-on-a-bight

Step B—Intermediate half hitches

Step C—Final knot

Figure 9-148. Single cord lacing method.

Figure 9-149. Double cord lacing.

is a clove hitch secured by a double-looped overhand knot. 
[Figure 9-148, step A] Use the double cordlacing method on 
wire bundles 1 inch in diameter or larger. When using the 
double cord-lacing method, employ a bowline-on-a-bight as 
the starting knot. [Figure 9-149, step A]

Tying
Use wire group or bundle ties where the supports for the 
wire are more than 12 inches apart. A tie consists of a clove 
hitch around the wire group or bundle, secured by a square 
knot. [Figure 9-150]


9-90

Wrap cord twice over bundle Clove hitch and square knot

Figure 9-150. Tying.

Figure 9-151. Wire strippers.

Wire Termination
Stripping Wire 
Before wire can be assembled to connectors, terminals, 
splices, etc., the insulation must be stripped from connecting 
ends to expose the bare conductor. Copper wire can be stripped 
in a number of ways depending on the size and insulation. 

Aluminum wire must be stripped using extreme care, since 
individual strands break very easily after being nicked. 
The following general precautions are recommended when 
stripping any type of wire:

1. When using any type of wire stripper, hold the wire 
so that it is perpendicular to cutting blades.

2. Adjust automatic stripping tools carefully; follow the 
manufacturer’s instructions to avoid nicking, cutting, 
or otherwise damaging strands. This is especially 
important for aluminum wires and for copper wires 
smaller than No. 10. Examine stripped wires for 
damage. Cut off and restrip (if length is sufficient), 
or reject and replace any wires having more than the 
allowable number of nicked or broken strands listed 
in the manufacturer’s instructions. 

3. Make sure insulation is clean-cut with no frayed or 
ragged edges. Trim, if necessary.

4. Make sure all insulation is removed from stripped area. 
Some types of wire are supplied with a transparent 
layer of insulation between the conductor and the 
primary insulation. If this is present, remove it. 

5. When using hand-plier strippers to remove lengths of 
insulation longer than 3⁄4 inch, it is easier to accomplish 
in two or more operations.

6. Retwist copper strands by hand or with pliers, 
if necessary, to restore natural lay and tightness  
of strands.

A pair of handheld wire strippers is shown in Figure 9-151. 
This tool is commonly used to strip most types of wire. The
following general procedures describe the steps for stripping 
wire with a hand stripper.

1. Insert wire into exact center of correct cutting slot 
for wire size to be stripped. Each slot is marked with 
wire size.

2. Close handles together as far as they will go.

3. Release handles, allowing wire holder to return to the 
open position.

4. Remove stripped wire.
 

Terminals are attached to the ends of electrical wires to 
facilitate connection of the wires to terminal strips or items 
of equipment. [Figure 9-152] The tensile strength of the 
wire-to-terminal joint should be at least equivalent to the 
tensile strength of the wire itself, and its resistance negligible 
relative to the normal resistance of the wire.

The following should be considered in the selection of wire 
terminals: current rating, wire size (gauge) and insulation 
diameter, conductor material compatibility, stud size, 
insulation material compatibility, application environment, 
and solder versus solderless.


9-91

Barrel

Wire insulation Stripped wire

Color-coded insulation

Insulation grip Tongue

X
X

22
-1

B

Manufacturer’s
mark

Range of wire sizes

Figure 9-152. Ring-tongue terminals.

Figure 9-153. Terminal strip. 
Figure 9-154. Wire terminal.

Preinsulated crimp-type ring-tongue terminals are preferred. 
The strength, size, and supporting means of studs and 
binding posts, as well as the wire size, may be considered 
when determining the number of terminals to be attached 
to any one post. In high-temperature applications, the 
terminal temperature rating must be greater than the ambient 
temperature plus current related temperature rise. Use of 
nickel-plated terminals and of uninsulated terminals with 
high-temperature insulating sleeves should be considered. 
Terminal blocks should be provided with adequate electrical 
clearance or insulation strips between mounting hardware 
and conductive parts.

Terminal Strips
Wires are usually joined at terminal strips. [Figure 9-153] A 
terminal strip fitted with barriers may be used to prevent 
the terminals on adjacent studs from contacting each other. 
Studs should be anchored against rotation. When more than 
four terminals are to be connected together, a small metal bus 
should be mounted across two or more adjacent studs. In all 
cases, the current should be carried by the terminal contact 

surfaces and not by the stud itself. Defective studs should be 
replaced with studs of the same size and material since terminal 
strip studs of the smaller sizes may shear due to overtightening 
the nut. The replacement stud should be securely mounted in 
the terminal strip and the terminal securing nut should be tight. 
Terminal strips should be mounted in such a manner that loose 
metallic objects cannot fall across the terminals or studs. It 
is good practice to provide at least one spare stud for future 
circuit expansion or in case a stud is broken.

Terminal strips that provide connection of radio and 
electronic systems to the aircraft electrical system should 
be inspected for loose connections, metallic objects that 
may have fallen across the terminal strip, dirt and grease 
accumulation, etc. These conditions can cause arcing, which 
may result in a fire or system failures.

Terminal Lugs
Wire terminal lugs should be used to connect wiring to terminal 
block studs or equipment terminal studs. No more than four 
terminal lugs, or three terminal lugs and a bus bar, should be 
connected to any one stud. The total number of terminal lugs 
per stud includes a common bus bar joining adjacent studs. 
Four terminal lugs plus a common bus bar are not permitted 
on one stud. Terminal lugs should be selected with a stud 
hole diameter that matches the diameter of the stud. However, 
when the terminal lugs attached to a stud vary in diameter, 
the greatest diameter should be placed on the bottom and the 
smallest diameter on top. Tightening terminal connections 
should not deform the terminal lugs or the studs. Terminal lugs 
should be positioned so that bending of the terminal lug is not 
required to remove the fastening screw or nut, and movement 
of the terminal lugs tends to tighten the connection.

Copper Wire Terminals

Solderless crimp-style, copper wire, terminal lugs may be 
used which conform to MIL-T-7928. Spacers or washers 
should not be used between the tongues of terminal lugs. 
[Figure 9-154]


9-92

Figure 9-155. Terminal splices.

Figure 9-156. Crimping pliers. 

Figure 9-157. Junction boxes. 

Aluminum Wire Terminals

The aluminum terminal lugs should be crimped to aluminum 
wire only. The tongue of the aluminum terminal lugs, or the 
total number of tongues of aluminum terminal lugs when 
stacked, should be sandwiched between two flat washers 
when terminated on terminal studs. Spacers or washers 
should not be used between the tongues of terminal lugs. 
Special attention should be given to aluminum wire and cable 
installations to guard against conditions that would result in 
excessive voltage drop and high resistance at junctions that 
may ultimately lead to failure of the junction. Examples of 
such conditions are improper installation of terminals and 
washers, improper torsion (torquing of nuts), and inadequate 
terminal contact areas.

Pre-Insulated Splices

Pre-insulated terminal lugs and splices must be installed using 
a high-quality crimping tool. Such tools are provided with 
positioners for the wire size and are adjusted for each wire 
size. It is essential that the crimp depth be appropriate for 
each wire size. If the crimp is too deep, it may break or cut 
individual strands. If the crimp is not deep enough, it may not 
be tight enough to retain the wire in the terminal or connector. 
Crimps that are not tight enough are also susceptible to high 
resistance due to corrosion buildup between the crimped 
terminal and the wire. [Figure 9-155]

Crimping Tools

Hand, portable, and stationary power tools are available for 
crimping terminal lugs. These tools crimp the barrel to the 
conductor, and simultaneously form the insulation support 
to the wire insulation. [Figure 9-156]

Emergency Splicing Repairs
Broken wires can be repaired by means of crimped splices, 
by using terminal lugs from which the tongue has been cut 
off, or by soldering together and potting broken strands. 
These repairs are applicable to copper wire. Damaged 
aluminum wire must not be temporarily spliced. These 
repairs are for temporary emergency use only and should  

be replaced as soon as possible with permanent repairs. 
Since some manufacturers prohibit splicing, the applicable 
manufacturer’s instructions should always be consulted.

Junction Boxes 
Junction boxes are used for collecting, organizing, and 
distributing circuits to the appropriate harnesses that are 
attached to the equipment. [Figure 9-157] Junction boxes are 
also used to conveniently house miscellaneous components, 
such as relays and diodes. Junction boxes that are used in 
high-temperature areas should be made of stainless steel.


9-93

Figure 9-158. Electrical connectors. 

Replacement junction boxes should be fabricated using 
the same material as the original or from a fire-resistant, 
nonabsorbent material, such as aluminum, or an acceptable 
plastic material. Where fireproofing is necessary, a stainless 
steel junction box is recommended. Rigid construction 
prevents oil-canning of the box sides that could result in 
internal short circuits. In all cases, drain holes should be 
provided in the lowest portion of the box. Cases of electrical 
power equipment must be insulated from metallic structure 
to avoid ground fault related fires. 

The junction box arrangement should permit easy access to 
any installed items of equipment, terminals, and wires. Where 
marginal clearances are unavoidable, an insulating material 
should be inserted between current carrying parts and any 
grounded surface. It is not good practice to mount equipment 
on the covers or doors of junction boxes, since inspection 
for internal clearance is impossible when the door or cover 
is in the closed position.

Junction boxes should be securely mounted to the aircraft 
structure in such a manner that the contents are readily 
accessible for inspection. When possible, the open side 
should face downward or at an angle so that loose metallic 
objects, such as washers or nuts, tend to fall out of the junction 
box rather than wedge between terminals.

Junction box layouts should take into consideration the 
necessity for adequate wiring space and possible future 
additions. Electrical wire bundles should be laced or clamped 
inside the box so that cables do not touch other components, 
prevent ready access, or obscure markings or labels. Cables 
at entrance openings should be protected against chafing by 
using grommets or other suitable means.

AN/MS Connectors
Connectors (plugs and receptacles) facilitate maintenance 
when frequent disconnection is required. There is a multitude 
of types of connectors. The connector types that use crimped 
contacts are generally used on aircraft. Some of the more 
common types are the round cannon type, the rectangular, 
and the module blocks. Environmentally resistant connectors 
should be used in applications subject to fluids, vibration, 
heat, mechanical shock, and/or corrosive elements.

When HIRF/lightning protection is required, special 
attention should be given to the terminations of individual 
or overall shields. The number and complexity of wiring 
systems have resulted in an increased use of electrical 
connectors. [Figure 9-158] The proper choice and application 
of connectors is a significant part of the aircraft wiring 
system. Connectors must be kept to a minimum, selected, 
and installed to provide the maximum degree of safety and  

reliability to the aircraft. For the installation of any particular 
connector assembly, the specification of the manufacturer or 
the appropriate governing agency must be followed.

Types of Connector

Connectors must be identified by an original identification 
number derived from MIL Specification (MS) or OEM 
specification. Figure 9-159 provides information about MS 
style connectors.

Environment-resistant connectors are used in applications 
where they are probably subjected to fluids, vibration, heat, 
mechanical shock, corrosive elements, etc. Firewall class 
connectors incorporating these same features should, in 
addition, be able to prevent the penetration of the fire through 
the aircraft firewall connector opening and continue to 
function without failure for a specified period of time when 
exposed to fire. Hermetic connectors provide a pressure 
seal for maintaining pressurized areas. When EMI/RFI 
protection is required, special attention should be given to 
the termination of individual and overall shields. Backshell 
adapters designed for shield termination, connectors with 
conductive finishes, and EMI grounding fingers are available 
for this purpose.

Rectangular connectors are typically used in applications 
where a very large number of circuits are accommodated in 
a single mated pair. [Figure 9-160] They are available with a 
great variety of contacts, which can include a mix of standard, 
coaxial, and large power types. Coupling is accomplished by 
various means. Smaller types are secured with screws which 
hold their flanges together. Larger ones have integral guide 
pins that ensure correct alignment, or jackscrews that both 
align and lock the connectors. Rack and panel connectors 
use integral or rack-mounted pins for alignment and box 
mounting hardware for couplings.


9-94

MS27480         E 10 A 6 P B

MIL SPECIFICATION
CLASS

SHELL SIZE

POLARIZATION
CONTACT STYLE
INSERT ARRANGEMENT
FINISH

MS27472 Wall mount receptacle MS27484 Straight plug, EMI grounding
MS27473 Straight plug MS27497 Wall receptacle, back panel mounting
MS27474 Jam nut receptacle MS27499 Box mounting receptacle
MS27475 Hermetic wall mount receptacle MS27500 90° Plug (note 1)
MS27476 Hermetic box mount receptacle MS27503 Hermetic solder mount receptacle (note 1)
MS27477 Hermetic jam nut receptacle MS27504 Box mount receptacle (note 1)
MS27478 Hermetic solder mount receptacle MS27508 Box mount receptacle, back panel mounting
MS27479 Wall mount receptacle (note 1) MS27513 Box mount receptacle, long grommet
MS27480 Straight plug(note 1) MS27664 Wall mount receptacle, back panel mounting 
MS27481 Jam nut receptacle (note 1)  (note 1)
MS27482 Hermetic wall mount receptacle (note 1) MS27667 Thru-bulkhead receptacle
MS27483 Hermetic jam nut receptacle (note 1)

NOTE
1. Active Supersedes

 MS27472 MS27479
 MS27473 MS27480
 MS27474 MS27481
 MS27475 MS27482
 MS27477 MS27483
 MS27473 with MS27507 elbow MS27500
 MS27478 MS27503
 MS27499 MS27504
 MS27497 MS27664

CLASS
E Environment-resisting box and thru-bulkhead mounting
 types only (see class T)
P Potting—includes potting form and short rear grommet
T Environment-resisting wall and jam-nut mounting
 receptacle and plug types: thread and teeth for 
 accessory attachment
Y Hermetically sealed

FINISH
A Silver to light iridescent yellow color cadmium plate 
 over nickel (conductive) –65 °C to +150 °C (inactive for
 new design) 

B Olive drab cadmium plate over suitable underplate 
 (conductive), –65 °C to 175 °C
C Anodic (nonconductive), –65 °C to + 175 °C
D Fused tin, carbon steel(conductive), –65 °C to +150 °C
E Corrosion resistant steel (cres), passivated
 (conductive), –65 °C to +200 °C
F Electroless nickel coating (conductive), –65 °C to 
 +200 °C
N Hermetic seal or environment resisting cres 
 (conductive plating), –65 °C to +200 °C

CONTACT STYLE
A Without pin contacts
B Without socket contacts
C Feed through
P Pin contact—including hermetics with solder cups
S Socket contacts—including hermetics with solder cups
X Pin contacts with eyelet (hermetic)
Z Socket contacts with eyelet (hermetic)

POLARIZATION
A, B   Normal—no letter required
C, or D 

Figure 9-159. MS connector information sheet. 

Module blocks are types of junctions that accept crimped 
contacts similar to those on connectors. Some use internal 
busing to provide a variety of circuit arrangements. They 
are useful where a number of wires are connected for power 
or signal distribution. When used as grounding modules, 
they save and reduce hardware installation on the aircraft. 

Standardized modules are available with wire end grommet 
seals for environmental applications and are track mounted. 
Function module blocks are used to provide an easily 
wired package for environment-resistant mounting of small 
resistors, diodes, filters, and suppression networks. In-line 
terminal junctions are sometimes used in lieu of a connector 


9-95

Figure 9-160. Rectangular connectors. 

Figure 9-161. Connector arrangement to avoid wrong connection.

when only a few wires are terminated and when the ability to 
disconnect the wires is desired. The in-line terminal junction 
is environment resistant. The terminal junction splice is 
small and may be tied to the surface of a wire bundle when 
approved by the OEM.

Voltage and Current Rating

Selected connectors must be rated for continuous operation 
under the maximum combination of ambient temperature 
and circuit current load. Hermetic connectors and connectors 
used in circuit applications involving high-inrush currents 
should be derated. It is good engineering practice to conduct 
preliminary testing in any situation where the connector 
is to operate with most or all of its contacts at maximum 
rated current load. When wiring is operating with a high 
conductor temperature near its rated temperature, connector 
contact sizes should be suitably rated for the circuit load. 
This may require an increase in wire size. Voltage derating 
is required when connectors are used at high altitude in 
nonpressurized areas. 

Spare Contacts for Future Wiring

To accommodate future wiring additions, spare contacts are 
normally provided. Locating the unwired contacts along 
the outer part of the connector facilitates future access. A 
good practice is to provide two spares on connectors with 
25 or fewer contacts; 4 spares on connectors with 26 to 
100 contacts; and 6 spares on connectors with more than 
100 contacts. Spare contacts are not normally provided on 
receptacles of components that are unlikely to have added 
wiring. Connectors must have all available contact cavities 
filled with wired or unwired contacts. Unwired contacts 
should be provided with a plastic grommet sealing plug.

Wire Installation into the Connector

Wires that perform the same function in redundant systems 
must be routed through separate connectors. On systems 
critical to flight safety, system operation wiring should be 
routed through separate connectors from the wiring used 
for system failure warning. It is also good practice to route 
a system’s indication wiring in separate connectors from its 
failure warning circuits to the extent practicable. These steps 
can reduce an aircraft’s susceptibility to incidents that might 
result from connector failures.

Adjacent Locations

Mating of adjacent connectors should not be possible. In order 
to ensure this, adjacent connector pairs must be different in 
shell size, coupling means, insert arrangement, or keying 
arrangement. When such means are impractical, wires should 
be routed and clamped so that incorrectly mated pairs cannot 
reach each other. Reliance on markings or color stripes 
is not recommended as they are likely to deteriorate with  
age. [Figure 9-161]

Sealing

Connectors must be of a type that excludes moisture entry 
through the use of peripheral and interfacial seal that are 
compressed when the connector is mated. Moisture entry 
through the rear of the connector must be avoided by 
correctly matching the wire’s outside diameter with the 
connector’s rear grommet sealing range. It is recommended 
that no more than one wire be terminated in any crimp style 
contact. The use of heat-shrinkable tubing to build up the 
wire diameter, or the application of potting to the wire entry 
area as additional means of providing a rear compatibility 


9-96

Figure 9-162. Backshells with strain relief.

Figure 9-163. Coaxial cables. 

with the rear grommet is recommended. These extra means 
have inherent penalties and should be considered only where 
other means cannot be used. Unwired spare contacts should 
have a correctly sized plastic plug installed.

Drainage

Connectors must be installed in a manner that ensures 
moisture and fluids drain out of and not into the connector 
when unmated. Wiring must be routed so that moisture 
accumulated on the bundle drains away from connectors. 
When connectors must be mounted in a vertical position, 
as through a shelf or floor, the connectors must be potted or 
environmentally sealed. In this situation, it is better to have 
the receptacle faced downward so that it is less susceptible 
to collecting moisture when unmated.

Wire Support 

A rear accessory back shell must be used on connectors that 
are not enclosed. Connectors with very small size wiring, or 
subject to frequent maintenance activity, or located in high-
vibration areas must be provided with a strain-relief-type back 
shell. The wire bundle should be protected from mechanical 
damage with suitable cushion material where it is secured 
by the clamp. Connectors that are potted or have molded 
rear adapters do not normally use a separate strain relief 
accessory. Strain relief clamps should not impart tension on 
wires between the clamp and contact. [Figure 9-162]

Sufficient wire length must be provided at connectors to 
ensure a proper drip loop and that there is no strain on 
termination after a complete replacement of the connector 
and its contacts.

Coaxial Cable
All wiring needs to be protected from damage. However, 
coaxial and triaxial cables are particularly vulnerable to 
certain types of damage. Personnel should exercise care while 
handling or working around coaxial. [Figure 9-163] Coaxial 

damage can occur when clamped too tightly, or when they are 
bent sharply (normally at or near connectors). Damage can 
also be incurred during unrelated maintenance actions around 
the coaxial cable. Coaxial cable can be severely damaged on 
the inside without any evidence of damage on the outside. 
Coaxial cables with solid center conductors should not be 
used. Stranded center coaxial cables can be used as a direct 
replacement for solid center coaxial. [Figure 9-164] Coaxial 
cable precautions include:

• Never kink coaxial cable.

• Never drop anything on coaxial cable.

• Never step on coaxial cable.

• Never bend coaxial cable sharply.

• Never loop coaxial cable tighter than the allowable 
bend radius.

• Never pull on coaxial cable except in a straight line.

• Never use coaxial cable for a handle, lean on it, or 
hang things on it (or any other wire).

Wire Inspection
Aircraft service imposes severe environmental condition on 
electrical wire. To ensure satisfactory service, inspect wire 
annually for abrasions, defective insulation, condition of 
terminations, and potential corrosion. Grounding connections 
for power, distribution equipment, and electromagnetic 
shielding must be given particular attention to ensure that 
electrical bonding resistance has not been significantly 
increased by the loosening of connections or corrosion.

Electrical System Components
Switches
Switches are devices that open and close circuits. They 
consist of one or more pair of contacts. The current in the 
circuit flows when the contacts are closed. Switches with 


9-97

Plug Straight receptacle Flange mount receptacle

Plug Straight receptacle Flange mount receptacle

Plug Straight receptacle Flange mount receptacle

Plug Straight receptacle Flange mount receptacle

BNC series connectors

TNC series connectors

N series connectors

C series connectors

Figure 9-164. Coaxial cable connectors. 

momentary contacts actuate the circuit temporarily, and they 
return to the normal position with an internal spring when 
the switch is released. Switches with continuous contacts 
remain in position when activated. Hazardous errors in 
switch operation can be avoided by logical and consistent 
installation. Two-position on/off switches should be mounted 

so that the on position is reached by an upward or forward 
movement of the toggle. When the switch controls movable 
aircraft elements, such as landing gear or flaps, the toggle 
should move in the same direction as the desired motion. 
Inadvertent operation of a switch can be prevented by 
mounting a suitable guard over the switch. [Figure 9-165]


9-98

 Nominal system
voltage (DC)

 Type of load  Derating factor

28V

28V

28V

28V

12V

12V

12V

12V

8

4

2

3

5

2

1

2

 Lamp

Inductive

Resistive

Motor

Lamp

Inductive

Resistive

Motor

Figure 9-165. Switch guard. 

Figure 9-166. Derating table for switches.

A specifically designed switch should be used in all circuits 
where a switch malfunction would be hazardous. Such 
switches are of rugged construction and have sufficient 
contact capacity to break, make, and carry continuously 
the connected load current. Snap action design is generally 
preferred to obtain rapid opening and closing of contacts 
regardless of the speed of the operating toggle or plunger, 
thereby minimizing contact arcing. The nominal current 
rating of the conventional aircraft switch is usually stamped 
on the switch housing. This rating represents the continuous 
current rating with the contacts closed. Switches should be 
derated from their nominal current rating for the following 
types of circuits:

1. High rush-in circuits—contain incandescent lamps 
that can draw an initial current 15 times greater than 
the continuous current. Contact burning or welding 
may occur when the switch is closed.

2. Inductive circuits—magnetic energy stored in solenoid 
coils or relays is released and appears as an arc when 
the control switch is opened.

3. Motors—DC motors draw several times their rated 
current during starting, and magnetic energy stored 
in their armature and field coils is released when the 
control switch is opened.

Figure 9-166 is used for selecting the proper nominal switch 
rating when the continuous load current is known. This 
selection is essentially a derating to obtain reasonable switch 
efficiency and service life. 

Type of Switches
Single-pole single-throw (SPST)—opens and closes a single 
circuit. Pole indicates the number of separate circuits that can 
be activated, and throw indicates the number of current paths. 
 
Double-pole single-throw (DPST)—turn two circuits on and 
off with one lever. 
 
Single-pole double-throw (SPDT)—route circuit current to 
either of two paths. The switch is ON in both positions. For 
example, switch turns on red lamp in one position and turns 
on green lamp in the other position. 

Double-pole double-throw (DPDT)—activates two separate 
circuits at the same time. 

Double-throw switches—have either two or three positions.

Two-position switch—pole always connected to one of the 
two throws. Three-position switches have a center OFF 
position that disconnects the pole from both throws.

Spring-loaded switches—available in two types: 1) normally 
open (NO) and 2) normally closed (NC). The contacts of 
the NO switch are disconnected in the normal position and 
become closed when the switch is activated. The switch 
returns to the normal position when the applied force to 
the switch is released. The contacts of the NC switch are 
connected in the normal position and become open when the 
switch is activated. The switch returns to the normal position 
when the applied force to the switch is released.

Toggle and Rocker Switches
Toggle and rocker switches control most of aircraft’s 
electrical components. [Figure 9-167] Aircraft that are  


9-99

Figure 9-167. Toggle and rocker switches. 

Figure 9-168. A micro switch. 

Figure 9-169. Solenoid.

outfitted with a glass cockpit often use push buttons to control 
electrical components.

Rotary Switches
Rotary switches are activated by twisting a knob or shaft and 
are commonly found on radio control panels. Rotary switches 
are utilized for controlling more than two circuits. 

Precision (Micro) Switches
Micro switches require very little pressure to activate. These 
types of switches are spring loaded, once the pressure is 
removed, the contacts return to the normal position. These 
types of switches are typically single pole double throw 
(SPDT) or double pole double throw (DPDT) and have three 
contacts: normally open, normally closed, and common. 
Micro switches are used to detect position or to limit travel 
of moving parts, such as landing gear, flaps, spoilers, etc. 
[Figure 9-168]

Relays and Solenoids (Electromagnetic Switches)
Relays are used to control the flow of large currents using a 
small current. A low-power DC circuit is used to activate the 

relay and control the flow of large AC currents. They are used 
to switch motors and other electrical equipment on and off 
and to protect them from overheating. A solenoid is a special 
type of relay that has a moving core. The electromagnet core 
in a relay is fixed. Solenoids are mostly used as mechanical 
actuators but can also be used for switching large currents. 
Relays are only used to switch currents. 

Solenoids
Solenoids are used as switching devices where a weight 
reduction can be achieved or electrical controls can be 
simplified. The foregoing discussion of switch ratings is 
generally applicable to solenoid contact ratings. Solenoids 
have a movable core/armature that is usually made of steel 
or iron, and the coil is wrapped around the armature. The 
solenoid has an electromagnetic tube and the armature moves 
in and out of the tube. [Figure 9-169]

Relays
The two main types of relays are electromechanical and 
solid state. Electromechanical relays have a fixed core and 
a moving plate with contacts on it, while solid-state relays 
work similar to transistors and have no moving parts. Current 
flowing through the coil of an electromechanical relay creates 
a magnetic field that attracts a lever and changes the switch 


9-100

 Wire AN
gauge copper

 Circuit breaker
amperage

 Fuse amperage

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

1

0

5

5

10

10

15

20

30

50

70

70

100

150

150

 5

 7.5

 10

 15

 20

 30

 40

 50

 80

 100

 125

Figure 9-170. Relay.

Figure 9-171. Wired and circuit protection chart. 

Figure 9-172. A fuse.

contacts. The coil current can be on or off so relays have 
two switch positions, and they are double throw switches. 
Residual magnetism is a common problem and the contacts 
may stay closed or are opened by a slight amount of residual 
magnetism. A relay is an electrically operated switch and 
is therefore subject to dropout under low system voltage 
conditions. Relays allow one circuit to switch a second circuit 
that can be completely separate from the first. For example, 
a low voltage DC battery circuit can use a relay to switch 
a 110-volt three-phase AC circuit. There is no electrical 
connection inside the relay between the two circuits; the link 
is magnetic and mechanical. [Figure 9-170]

Current Limiting Devices
Conductors should be protected with circuit breakers or fuses 
located as close as possible to the electrical power source 
bus. Normally, the manufacturer of the electrical equipment 
specifies the fuse or circuit breaker to be used when installing 
equipment. The circuit breaker or fuse should open the circuit 
before the conductor emits smoke. To accomplish this, the 
time current characteristic of the protection device must fall 
below that of the associated conductor. Circuit protector 
characteristics should be matched to obtain the maximum 
utilization of the connected equipment. Figure 9-171 shows a 
chart used in selecting the circuit breaker and fuse protection 
for copper conductors. This limited chart is applicable to a 
specific set of ambient temperatures and wire bundle sizes 
and is presented as typical only. It is important to consult such 
guides before selecting a conductor for a specific purpose. 
For example, a wire run individually in the open air may be 
protected by the circuit breaker of the next higher rating to 
that shown on the chart.

Fuses
A fuse is placed in series with the voltage source and all 
current must flow through it. [Figure 9-172] The fuse consists 
of a strip of metal that is enclosed in a glass or plastic housing. 
The metal strip has a low melting point and is usually made 

of lead, tin, or copper. When the current exceeds the capacity 
of the fuse the metal strip heats up and breaks. As a result of 
this, the flow of current in the circuit stops.

There are two basic types of fuses: fast acting and slow 
blow. The fast-acting type opens very quickly when their 
particular current rating is exceeded. This is important for 
electric devices that can quickly be destroyed when too much 
current flows through them for even a very small amount 
of time. Slow blow fuses have a coiled construction inside. 
They are designed to open only on a continued overload, 
such as a short circuit.

Circuit Breakers
A circuit breaker is an automatically operated electrical 
switch designed to protect an electrical circuit from damage 
caused by an overload or short circuit. Its basic function 
is to detect a fault condition and immediately discontinue 
electrical flow. Unlike a fuse that operates once and then has 
to be replaced, a circuit breaker can be reset to resume normal 
operation. All resettable circuit breakers should open the 
circuit in which they are installed regardless of the position of 
the operating control when an overload or circuit fault exists. 
Such circuit breakers are referred to as trip-free. Automatic 


9-101

Figure 9-173. Circuit breaker panel.

Figure 9-174. A left wing tip position light (red) and a white strobe 
light.

Figure 9-175. A right wing tip position light, also known as a 
navigation light. 

reset circuit breakers automatically reset themselves. They 
should not be used as circuit protection devices in aircraft. 
When a circuit breaker trips, the electrical circuit should be 
checked and the fault removed before the circuit breaker 
is reset. Sometimes circuit breakers trip for no apparent 
reason, and the circuit breaker can be reset one time. If the 
circuit breaker trips again, there exists a circuit fault and the 
technician must troubleshoot the circuit before resetting the 
circuit breaker. [Figure 9-173]

Some new aircraft designs use a digital circuit protection 
architecture. This system monitors the amperage through 
a particular circuit. When the maximum amperage for that 
circuit is reached, the power is rerouted away from the circuit. 
This system reduces the use of mechanical circuit breakers. 
The advantages are weight savings and the reduction of 
mechanical parts.

Aircraft Lighting Systems
Aircraft lighting systems provide illumination for both exterior 
and interior use. Lights on the exterior provide illumination 
for such operations as landing at night, inspection of icing 
conditions, and safety from midair collision. Interior lighting 
provides illumination for instruments, cockpits, cabins, and 
other sections occupied by crewmembers and passengers. 
Certain special lights, such as indicator and warning lights, 
indicate the operation status of equipment.

Exterior Lights
Position, anticollision, landing, and taxi lights are common 
examples of aircraft exterior lights. Some lights are required 
for night operations. Other types of exterior lights, such as 
wing inspection lights, are of great benefit for specialized 
flying operations.

Position Lights
Aircraft operating at night must be equipped with position 
lights that meet the minimum requirements specified by Title 
14 of the Code of Federal Regulations. A set of position 
lights consist of one red, one green, and one white light. 
[Figures 9-174 and 9-175]

On some types of installations, a switch in the cockpit 
provides for steady or flashing operation of the position 
lights. On many aircraft, each light unit contains a single lamp 
mounted on the surface of the aircraft. Other types of position 
light units contain two lamps and are often streamlined into 
the surface of the aircraft structure. The green light unit is 
always mounted at the extreme tip of the right wing. The red 
unit is mounted in a similar position on the left wing. The 


9-102

25-53-02

CB121
NAV LIGHT

5A

W159

A223 panel assembly
subpanel, L INBD

WG
STA

124.6

H
91-29

J282  P282

WG
STA

124.6

H
91-28

J281  P281

L168D20

L168A20

L168F20

L168B20

L168G20

I

P238  J238

G
Ground 20
Nav light PWR 20 DS104/XDS104

R Nav light

R
Ground 20
Nav light PWR 20 DS104/XDS104

L Nav light

C
Blk
Red DS103/XDS103

Tail nav light

I

P239  J239

L170A20N

33-47GS129

Figure 9-176. Navigation light system schematic. 

Figure 9-177. Anticollision lights.

white unit is usually located on the vertical stabilizer in a 
position where it is clearly visible through a wide angle from 
the rear of the aircraft. Figure 9-176 illustrates a schematic 
diagram of a position light circuit. Position lights are also 
known as navigation lights.

There are, of course, many variations in the position light 
circuits used on different aircraft. All circuits are protected by 
fuses or circuit breakers, and many circuits include flashing 
and dimming equipment. Small aircraft are usually equipped 
with a simplified control switch and circuitry. In some cases, 
one control knob or switch is used to turn on several sets 
of lights; for example, one type utilizes a control knob, the 
first movement of which turns on the position lights and the 
instrument panel lights. Further rotation of the control knob 
increases the intensity of only the panel lights. A flasher unit 
is seldom included in the position light circuitry of very light 
aircraft but is used in small twin-engine aircraft. Traditional 
position lights use incandescent light bulbs. LED lights have 
been introduced on modern aircraft because of their good 
visibility, high reliability, and low power consumption.

Anticollision Lights
An anticollision light system may consist of one or more 
lights. They are rotating beam lights that are usually installed 
on top of the fuselage or tail in such a location that the light 
does not affect the vision of the crewmember or detract from 
the visibility of the position lights. Large transport type 
aircraft use an anticollision light on top and one on the bottom 

of the aircraft. Figure 9-177 shows a typical anticollision 
light installation in a vertical stabilizer.


9-103

Figure 9-178. Landing lights.
Figure 9-179. Taxi lights.

An anticollision light unit usually consists of one or two 
rotating lights operated by an electric motor. The light may be 
fixed but mounted under rotating mirrors inside a protruding 
red glass housing. The mirrors rotate in an arc, and the 
resulting flash rate is between 40 and 100 cycles per minute. 
Newer aircraft designs use a LED type of anticollision light. 
The anticollision light is a safety light to warn other aircraft, 
especially in congested areas.

A white strobe light is a second type of anti-collision light 
that is also common. Usually mounted at the wing tips and, 
possibly, at empennage extremities, strobe lights produce an 
extremely bright intermittent flash of white light that is highly 
visible. The light is produced by a high voltage discharge of a 
capacitor. A dedicated power pack houses the capacitor and 
supplies voltage to a sealed xenon-filled tube. The xenon 
ionizes with a flash when the voltage is applied. A strobe 
light is shown in Figure 9-174.

Landing and Taxi Lights
Landing lights are installed in aircraft to illuminate runways 
during night landings. These lights are very powerful and 
are directed by a parabolic reflector at an angle providing a 
maximum range of illumination. Landing lights of smaller 
aircraft are usually located midway in the leading edge of 
each wing or streamlined into the aircraft surface. Landing 
lights for larger transport category aircraft are usually located 
in the leading edge of the wing close to the fuselage. Each 
light may be controlled by a relay, or it may be connected 
directly into the electric circuit. On some aircraft, the 
landing light is mounted in the same area with a taxi light. 
[Figure 9-178] A sealed beam, halogen, or high intensity 
xenon discharge lamp is used.

Taxi lights are designed to provide illumination on the ground 
while taxiing or towing the aircraft to or from a runway, taxi 

strip, or in the hangar area. [Figure 9-179] Taxi lights are 
not designed to provide the degree of illumination necessary 
for landing lights. On aircraft with tricycle landing gear, 
either single or multiple taxi lights are often mounted on 
the non-steerable part of the nose landing gear. They are 
positioned at an oblique angle to the center line of the aircraft 
to provide illumination directly in front of the aircraft and 
also some illumination to the right and left of the aircraft’s 
path. On some aircraft, the dual taxi lights are supplemented 
by wingtip clearance lights controlled by the same circuitry. 
Taxi lights are also mounted in the recessed areas of the wing 
leading edge, often in the same area with a fixed landing light. 
Many small aircraft are not equipped with any type of taxi 
light, but rely on the intermittent use of a landing light to 


9-104

24-53-02

CB121
TAXI LIGHT

15A

CB178
R LANDING

LIGHT

10A

W159

L178A16

L178A16

C
L177A18N
L176B18

DS110
XDS110
RIGHT LANDING
LIGHT

C
L179A16N
L178B16

DS106
XDS106
TAXI LIGHT

C
L174A18N
L173B18

DS109
XDS109
LEFT LANDING
LIGHT

L173A18

CR127

CR126

C
R

2
1
7

TB102

2

5

4

3

1
31-51-04L30A22

32-61

S104-4-20
4

5

32-61

6

S104 NOSE GEAR UP
LOCK SWITCH

A223 PANEL ASSY - SUBPANEL,
L INBOARD

CB177
L LANDING

LIGHT

10A

24-53-01

W119

Figure 9-181. Interior cockpit and cabin light system.

Figure 9-180. Taxi light circuit.

illuminate taxiing operations. Still other aircraft utilize 
a dimming resistor in the landing light circuit to provide 
reduced illumination for taxiing. A typical circuit for taxi 
lights is shown in Figure 9-180.

Some large aircraft are equipped with alternate taxi lights 
located on the lower surface of the aircraft, aft of the nose 
radome. These lights, operated by a separate switch from the 
main taxi lights, illuminate the area immediately in front of 
and below the aircraft nose.

Wing Inspection Lights
Some aircraft are equipped with wing inspection lights to 
illuminate the leading edge of the wings to permit observation 
of icing and general condition of these areas in flight. 
These lights permit visual detection of ice formation on 
wing leading edges while flying at night. They are usually 
controlled through a relay by an on/off toggle switch in the 
cockpit. Some wing inspection light systems may include 
or be supplemented by additional lights, sometimes called 
nacelle lights, that illuminate adjacent areas, such a cowl 
flaps or the landing gear. These are normally the same type 
of lights and can be controlled by the same circuits.

Interior Lights
Aircraft are equipped with interior lights to illuminate the 
cabin. [Figure 9-181] Often white and red light settings are 
provided. Commercial aircraft have a lighting systems that 
illuminates the main cabin, an independent lighting system 
so that passengers can read when the cabin lights are off, and 
an emergency lighting system on the floor of the aircraft to 
aid passengers of the aircraft during an emergency. 


9-105

Maintenance and Inspection of Lighting Systems
Inspection of an aircraft’s lighting system normally includes 
checking the condition and security of all visible wiring, 
connections, terminals, fuses, and switches. A continuity 
light or meter can be used in making these checks, since the 
cause of many troubles can often be located by systematically 
testing each circuit for continuity.

