
7-1

Chapter 7

Advanced Composite Materials
Description of Composite Structures
Introduction
Composite materials are becoming more important in the 
construction of aerospace structures. Aircraft parts made 
from composite materials, such as fairings, spoilers, and flight 
controls, were developed during the 1960s for their weight 
savings over aluminum parts. New generation large aircraft 
are designed with all composite fuselage and wing structures, 
and the repair of these advanced composite materials requires 
an in-depth knowledge of composite structures, materials, 
and tooling. The primary advantages of composite materials 
are their high strength, relatively low weight, and corrosion 
resistance.


7-2

Laminated Structures
Composite materials consist of a combination of materials that 
are mixed together to achieve specific structural properties. 
The individual materials do not dissolve or merge completely 
in the composite, but they act together as one. Normally, the 
components can be physically identified as they interface 
with one another. The properties of the composite material 
are superior to the properties of the individual materials from 
which it is constructed.

An advanced composite material is made of a fibrous material 
embedded in a resin matrix, generally laminated with fibers 
oriented in alternating directions to give the material strength 
and stiffness. Fibrous materials are not new; wood is the most 
common fibrous structural material known to man.

Applications of composites on aircraft include: 

• Fairings

• Flight control surfaces

• Landing gear doors

• Leading and trailing edge panels on the wing and 
stabilizer

• Interior components

• Floor beams and floor boards

• Vertical and horizontal stabilizer primary structure on 
large aircraft

• Primary wing and fuselage structure on new generation 
large aircraft

• Turbine engine fan blades

• Propellers

 
Major Components of a Laminate
An isotropic material has uniform properties in all directions. 
The measured properties of an isotropic material are 
independent of the axis of testing. Metals such as aluminum 
and titanium are examples of isotropic materials.

A fiber is the primary load carrying element of the composite 
material. The composite material is only strong and stiff in 
the direction of the fibers. Unidirectional composites have 
predominant mechanical properties in one direction and are 
said to be anisotropic, having mechanical and/or physical 
properties that vary with direction relative to natural reference 
axes inherent in the material. Components made from fiber-
reinforced composites can be designed so that the fiber 
orientation produces optimum mechanical properties, but 
they can only approach the true isotropic nature of metals, 
such as aluminum and titanium.

A matrix supports the fibers and bonds them together in the 
composite material. The matrix transfers any applied loads 
to the fibers, keeps the fibers in their position and chosen 
orientation, gives the composite environmental resistance, and 
determines the maximum service temperature of a composite.

Strength Characteristics
Structural properties, such as stiffness, dimensional stability, 
and strength of a composite laminate, depend on the stacking 
sequence of the plies. The stacking sequence describes 
the distribution of ply orientations through the laminate 
thickness. As the number of plies with chosen orientations 
increases, more stacking sequences are possible. For 
example, a symmetric eight-ply laminate with four different 
ply orientations has 24 different stacking sequences.

Fiber Orientation 
The strength and stiffness of a composite buildup depends 
on the orientation sequence of the plies. The practical range 
of strength and stiffness of carbon fiber extends from values 
as low as those provided by fiberglass to as high as those 
provided by titanium. This range of values is determined 
by the orientation of the plies to the applied load. Proper 
selection of ply orientation in advanced composite materials 
is necessary to provide a structurally efficient design. The 
part might require 0° plies to react to axial loads, ±45° plies 
to react to shear loads, and 90° plies to react to side loads. 
Because the strength design requirements are a function of 
the applied load direction, ply orientation and ply sequence 
have to be correct. It is critical during a repair to replace 
each damaged ply with a ply of the same material and ply 
orientation.

The fibers in a unidirectional material run in one direction 
and the strength and stiffness is only in the direction of the 
fiber. Pre-impregnated (prepreg) tape is an example of a 
unidirectional ply orientation.

The fibers in a bidirectional material run in two directions, 
typically 90° apart. A plain weave fabric is an example of 
a bidirectional ply orientation. These ply orientations have 
strength in both directions but not necessarily the same 
strength. [Figure 7-1]

The plies of a quasi-isotropic layup are stacked in a 0°, –45°, 
45°, and 90° sequence or in a 0°, –60°, and 60° sequence. 
[Figure 7-2] These types of ply orientation simulate 
the properties of an isotropic material. Many aerospace 
composite structures are made of quasi-isotropic materials. 


7-3

90
°0°

0°

0°

90°

+45°

–45°

90°

+45°

–45°

Bidirectional Unidirectional

Equal propertiesUnequal properties

0

0

9090

+45

−45+45

−45

Figure 7-1. Bidirectional and unidirectional material properties.

Figure 7-2. Quasi-isotropic material layup.

Figure 7-3. A warp clock.

Warp Clock
Warp indicates the longitudinal fibers of a fabric. The warp 
is the high strength direction due to the straightness of the 
fibers. A warp clock is used to describe direction of fibers 
on a diagram, spec sheet, or manufacturer’s sheets. If the 
warp clock is not available on the fabric, the orientation is 
defaulted to zero as the fabric comes off the roll. Therefore, 
90° to zero is the width of the fabric across. [Figure 7-3]

Fiber Forms
All product forms generally begin with spooled unidirectional 
raw fibers packaged as continuous strands. An individual fiber 
is called a filament. The word strand is also used to identify 
an individual glass fiber. Bundles of filaments are identified 
as tows, yarns, or rovings. Fiberglass yarns are twisted, while 
Kevlar® yarns are not. Tows and rovings do not have any 
twist. Most fibers are available as dry fiber that needs to 
be impregnated (impreg) with a resin before use or prepreg 
materials where the resin is already applied to the fiber.

Roving 
A roving is a single grouping of filament or fiber ends, such 
as 20-end or 60-end glass rovings. All filaments are in the 
same direction and they are not twisted. Carbon rovings are 
usually identified as 3K, 6K, or 12K rovings, K meaning 
1,000 filaments. Most applications for roving products utilize 
mandrels for filament winding and then resin cure to final 
configuration. 

Unidirectional (Tape) 
Unidirectional prepreg tapes have been the standard within 
the aerospace industry for many years, and the fiber is 
typically impregnated with thermosetting resins. The most 
common method of manufacture is to draw collimated raw 
(dry) strands into the impregnation machine where hot melted 
resins are combined with the strands using heat and pressure. 
Tape products have high strength in the fiber direction and 
virtually no strength across the fibers. The fibers are held in 
place by the resin. Tapes have a higher strength than woven 
fabrics. [Figure 7-4]

Bidirectional (Fabric)
Most fabric constructions offer more flexibility for layup 
of complex shapes than straight unidirectional tapes offer. 
Fabrics offer the option for resin impregnation either by 
solution or the hot melt process. Generally, fabrics used 
for structural applications use like fibers or strands of 
the same weight or yield in both the warp (longitudinal) 
and fill (transverse) directions. For aerospace structures, 
tightly woven fabrics are usually the choice to save weight, 
minimizing resin void size, and maintaining fiber orientation 
during the fabrication process.


7-4

Individual tows Individual tows
Resin

Filaments

0.0030 Inch

Tape Fabric

Figure 7-4. Tape and fabric products.

Woven structural fabrics are usually constructed with 
reinforcement tows, strands, or yarns interlocking upon 
themselves with over/under placement during the weaving 
process. The more common fabric styles are plain or satin 
weaves. The plain weave construction results from each 
fiber alternating over and then under each intersecting strand 
(tow, bundle, or yarn). With the common satin weaves, such 
as 5 harness or 8 harness, the fiber bundles traverse both in 
warp and fill directions changing over/under position less 
frequently. 

These satin weaves have less crimp and are easier to distort 
than a plain weave. With plain weave fabrics and most 5 
or 8 harness woven fabrics, the fiber strand count is equal 
in both warp and fill directions. For example, 3K plain 
weave often has an additional designation, such as 12 x 12, 
meaning there are twelve tows per inch in each direction. 
This count designation can be varied to increase or decrease 
fabric weight or to accommodate different fibers of varying 
weight. [Figure 7-5]

Nonwoven (Knitted or Stitched) 
Knitted or stitched fabrics can offer many of the mechanical 
advantages of unidirectional tapes. Fiber placement can be 
straight or unidirectional without the over/under turns of 
woven fabrics. The fibers are held in place by stitching with 
fine yarns or threads after preselected orientations of one or 
more layers of dry plies. These types of fabrics offer a wide 
range of multi-ply orientations. Although there may be some 
added weight penalties or loss of some ultimate reinforcement 
fiber properties, some gain of interlaminar shear and toughness 
properties may be realized. Some common stitching yarns are 
polyester, aramid, or thermoplastics. [Figure 7-6]

Types of Fiber
Fiberglass
Fiberglass is often used for secondary structure on aircraft, 
such as fairings, radomes, and wing tips. Fiberglass is also 
used for helicopter rotor blades. There are several types of 
fiberglass used in the aviation industry. Electrical glass, or 
E-glass, is identified as such for electrical applications. It 
has high resistance to current flow. E-glass is made from 
borosilicate glass. S-glass and S2-glass identify structural 
fiberglass that have a higher strength than E-glass. S-glass 
is produced from magnesia-alumina-silicate. Advantages 
of fiberglass are lower cost than other composite materials, 
chemical or galvanic corrosion resistance, and electrical 
properties (fiberglass does not conduct electricity). Fiberglass 
has a white color and is available as a dry fiber fabric or 
prepreg material.

Kevlar®

Kevlar® is DuPont’s name for aramid fibers. Aramid fibers 
are light weight, strong, and tough. Two types of aramid 
fiber are used in the aviation industry. Kevlar® 49 has a high 
stiffness and Kevlar® 29 has a low stiffness. An advantage 
of aramid fibers is their high resistance to impact damage, so 
they are often used in areas prone to impact damage. The main 
disadvantage of aramid fibers is their general weakness in 
compression and hygroscopy. Service reports have indicated 
that some parts made from Kevlar® absorb up to 8 percent 
of their weight in water. Therefore, parts made from aramid 
fibers need to be protected from the environment. Another 
disadvantage is that Kevlar® is difficult to drill and cut. The 
fibers fuzz easily and special scissors are needed to cut the 


7-5

8 harness satin weave
Example: 
Style 3K-135-8H carbon

Crowfoot satin weave
Example: 
Style 285 Kevlar®

5 harness satin weave
Example: 
Style 1K-50-5H carbon

8 shaft satin weave
Example: 
Style 181 fiberglass

Plain weave
Example: 
Style 3K-70-P carbon

4 shaft satin weave
Example: 
Style 120 fiberglass

8 shaft satin weave
Example: 
Style 1581 fiberglass

0°

90°

+45°

−45°

90°

Figure 7-5. Typical fabric weave styles. 

Figure 7-6. Nonwoven material (stitched).

material. Kevlar® is often used for military ballistic and 
body armor applications. It has a natural yellow color and 
is available as dry fabric and prepreg material. Bundles of 
aramid fibers are not sized by the number of fibers like carbon 
or fiberglass but by the weight.

Carbon/Graphite
One of the first distinctions to be made among fibers is the 
difference between carbon and graphite fibers, although 
the terms are frequently used interchangeably. Carbon and 
graphite fibers are based on graphene (hexagonal) layer 


7-6

Figure 7-7. Fiberglass (left), Kevlar® (middle), and carbon fiber 
material (right). Figure 7-8. Copper mesh lightning protection material.

networks present in carbon. If the graphene layers, or planes, 
are stacked with three dimensional order, the material is 
defined as graphite. Usually extended time and temperature 
processing is required to form this order, making graphite 
fibers more expensive. Bonding between planes is weak. 
Disorder frequently occurs such that only two-dimensional 
ordering within the layers is present. This material is defined 
as carbon.

Carbon fibers are very stiff and strong, 3 to 10 times stiffer 
than glass fibers. Carbon fiber is used for structural aircraft 
applications, such as floor beams, stabilizers, flight controls, 
and primary fuselage and wing structure. Advantages include 
its high strength and corrosion resistance. Disadvantages 
include lower conductivity than aluminum; therefore, a 
lightning protection mesh or coating is necessary for aircraft 
parts that are prone to lightning strikes. Another disadvantage 
of carbon fiber is its high cost. Carbon fiber is gray or black 
in color and is available as dry fabric and prepreg material. 
Carbon fibers have a high potential for causing galvanic 
corrosion when used with metallic fasteners and structures. 
[Figure 7-7]

Boron
Boron fibers are very stiff and have a high tensile and 
compressive strength. The fibers have a relatively large 
diameter and do not flex well; therefore, they are available 
only as a prepreg tape product. An epoxy matrix is often used 
with the boron fiber. Boron fibers are used to repair cracked 
aluminum aircraft skins, because the thermal expansion of 
boron is close to aluminum and there is no galvanic corrosion 
potential. The boron fiber is difficult to use if the parent 
material surface has a contoured shape. The boron fibers are 
very expensive and can be hazardous for personnel. Boron 
fibers are used primarily in military aviation applications.

Ceramic Fibers
Ceramic fibers are used for high-temperature applications, 
such as turbine blades in a gas turbine engine. The ceramic 
fibers can be used to temperatures up to 2,200 °F. 

Lightning Protection Fibers
An aluminum airplane is quite conductive and is able to 
dissipate the high currents resulting from a lightning strike. 
Carbon fibers are 1,000 times more resistive than aluminum 
to current flow, and epoxy resin is 1,000,000 times more 
resistive (i.e., perpendicular to the skin). The surface of an 
external composite component often consists of a ply or layer 
of conductive material for lightning strike protection because 
composite materials are less conductive than aluminum. 
Many different types of conductive materials are used 
ranging from nickel-coated graphite cloth to metal meshes 
to aluminized fiberglass to conductive paints. The materials 
are available for wet layup and as prepreg. 

In addition to a normal structural repair, the technician must 
also recreate the electrical conductivity designed into the 
part. These types of repair generally require a conductivity 
test to be performed with an ohmmeter to verify minimum 
electrical resistance across the structure. When repairing 
these types of structures, it is extremely important to use only 
the approved materials from authorized vendors, including 
such items as potting compounds, sealants, adhesives, and 
so forth. [Figures 7-8 and 7-9]

Matrix Materials
Thermosetting Resins
Resin is a generic term used to designate the polymer. The 
resin, its chemical composition, and physical properties 
fundamentally affect the processing, fabrication, and 


7-7

Figure 7-9. Aluminum mesh lightning protection material.

Figure 7-10. Two-part wet layup epoxy resin system with pump 
dispenser. 

ultimate properties of a composite material. Thermosetting 
resins are the most diverse and widely used of all man-made 
materials. They are easily poured or formed into any shape, 
are compatible with most other materials, and cure readily 
(by heat or catalyst) into an insoluble solid.  Thermosetting 
resins are also excellent adhesives and bonding agents.

Polyester Resins

Polyester resins are relatively inexpensive, fast processing 
resins used generally for low cost applications. Low smoke 
producing polyester resins are used for interior parts of 
the aircraft. Fiber-reinforced polyesters can be processed 
by many methods. Common processing methods include 
matched metal molding, wet layup, press (vacuum bag) 
molding, injection molding, filament winding, pultrusion, 
and autoclaving.

Vinyl Ester Resin

The appearance, handling properties, and curing characteristics 
of vinyl ester resins are the same as those of conventional 
polyester resins. However, the corrosion resistance and 
mechanical properties of vinyl ester composites are much 
improved over standard polyester resin composites.

Phenolic Resin

Phenol-formaldehyde resins were first produced commercially 
in the early 1900s for use in the commercial market. Urea-
formaldehyde and melamine-formaldehyde appeared in 
the 1920–1930s as a less expensive alternative for lower 
temperature use. Phenolic resins are used for interior 
components because of their low smoke and flammability 
characteristics.

Epoxy

Epoxies are polymerizable thermosetting resins and are 
available in a variety of viscosities from liquid to solid. 
There are many different types of epoxy, and the technician 
should use the maintenance manual to select the correct type 
for a specific repair. Epoxies are used widely in resins for 
prepreg materials and structural adhesives. The advantages of 
epoxies are high strength and modulus, low levels of volatiles, 
excellent adhesion, low shrinkage, good chemical resistance, 
and ease of processing. Their major disadvantages are 
brittleness and the reduction of properties in the presence of 
moisture. The processing or curing of epoxies is slower than 
polyester resins. Processing techniques include autoclave 
molding, filament winding, press molding, vacuum bag 
molding, resin transfer molding, and pultrusion. Curing 
temperatures vary from room temperature to approximately 
350 °F (180 °C). The most common cure temperatures range 
between 250° and 350 °F (120–180 °C). [Figure 7-10]

Polyimides

Polyimide resins excel in high-temperature environments 
where their thermal resistance, oxidative stability, low 
coefficient of thermal expansion, and solvent resistance 
benefit the design. Their primary uses are circuit boards 
and hot engine and airframe structures. A polyimide may be 
either a thermoset resin or a thermoplastic. Polyimides require 
high cure temperatures, usually in excess of 550 °F (290 °C). 
Consequently, normal epoxy composite bagging materials are 
not usable, and steel tooling becomes a necessity. Polyimide 
bagging and release films, such as Kapton® are used. It is 
extremely important that Upilex® replace the lower cost 
nylon bagging and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) release 
films common to epoxy composite processing. Fiberglass 
fabrics must be used for bleeder and breather materials 


7-8

instead of polyester mat materials due to the low melting 
point of polyester.

Polybenzimidazoles (PBI)

Polybenzimidazole resin is extremely high temperature 
resistant and is used for high-temperature materials. These 
resins are available as adhesive and fiber. 

Bismaleimides (BMI)

Bismaleimide resins have a higher temperature capability 
and higher toughness than epoxy resins, and they provide 
excellent performance at ambient and elevated temperatures. 
The processing of bismaleimide resins is similar to that 
for epoxy resins. BMIs are used for aero engines and high 
temperature components. BMIs are suitable for standard 
autoclave processing, injection molding, resin transfer 
molding, and sheet molded compound (SMC) among others. 

Thermoplastic Resins
Thermoplastic materials can be softened repeatedly by 
an increase of temperature and hardened by a decrease in 
temperature. Processing speed is the primary advantage of 
thermoplastic materials. Chemical curing of the material 
does not take place during processing, and the material can 
be shaped by molding or extrusion when it is soft.

Semicrystalline Thermoplastics

Semicrystalline thermoplastics possess properties of inherent 
flame resistance, superior toughness, good mechanical 
properties at elevated temperatures and after impact, and 
low moisture absorption. They are used in secondary and 
primary aircraft structures. Combined with reinforcing 
fibers, they are available in injection molding compounds, 
compression-moldable random sheets, unidirectional tapes, 
prepregs fabricated from tow (towpreg), and woven prepregs. 
Fibers impregnated in semicrystalline thermoplastics 
include carbon, nickel-coated carbon, aramid, glass, quartz,  
and others. 

Amorphous Thermoplastics

Amorphous thermoplastics are available in several physical 
forms, including films, filaments, and powders. Combined 
with reinforcing fibers, they are also available in injection 
molding compounds, compressive moldable random sheets, 
unidirectional tapes, woven prepregs, etc. The fibers used are 
primarily carbon, aramid, and glass. The specific advantages 
of amorphous thermoplastics depend upon the polymer. 
Typically, the resins are noted for their processing ease 
and speed, high temperature capability, good mechanical 
properties, excellent toughness and impact strength, 
and chemical stability. The stability results in unlimited 
shelf life, eliminating the cold storage requirements of  
thermoset prepregs.

Polyether Ether Ketone (PEEK) 

Polyether ether ketone, better known as PEEK, is a high-
temperature thermoplastic. This aromatic ketone material 
offers outstanding thermal and combustion characteristics 
and resistance to a wide range of solvents and proprietary 
fluids. PEEK can also be reinforced with glass and carbon.

Curing Stages of Resins
Thermosetting resins use a chemical reaction to cure. There 
are three curing stages, which are called A, B, and C. 

• A stage: The components of the resin (base material 
and hardener) have been mixed but the chemical 
reaction has not started. The resin is in the A stage 
during a wet layup procedure.

• B stage: The components of the resin have been mixed 
and the chemical reaction has started. The material has 
thickened and is tacky. The resins of prepreg materials 
are in the B stage. To prevent further curing the resin 
is placed in a freezer at 0 °F. In the frozen state, the 
resin of the prepreg material stays in the B stage. The 
curing starts when the material is removed from the 
freezer and warmed again.

• C stage: The resin is fully cured. Some resins cure 
at room temperature and others need an elevated 
temperature cure cycle to fully cure.

Pre-Impregnated Products (Prepregs)
Prepreg material consists of a combination of a matrix and 
fiber reinforcement. It is available in unidirectional form 
(one direction of reinforcement) and fabric form (several 
directions of reinforcement). All five of the major families of 
matrix resins can be used to impregnate various fiber forms. 
The resin is then no longer in a low-viscosity stage, but has 
been advanced to a B stage level of cure for better handling 
characteristics. The following products are available in 
prepreg form: unidirectional tapes, woven fabrics, continuous 
strand rovings, and chopped mat. Prepreg materials must be 
stored in a freezer at a temperature below 0 °F to retard the 
curing process. Prepreg materials are cured with an elevated 
temperature. Many prepreg materials used in aerospace 
are impregnated with an epoxy resin and they are cured at 
either 250 °F or 350 °F. Prepreg materials are cured with an 
autoclave, oven, or heat blanket. They are typically purchased 
and stored on a roll in a sealed plastic bag to avoid moisture 
contamination. [Figure 7-11] 

Dry Fiber Material
Dry fiber materials, such as carbon, glass, and Kevlar® are 
used for many aircraft repair procedures. The dry fabric is 
impregnated with a resin just before the repair work starts. 
This process is often called wet layup. The main advantage 
of using the wet layup process is that the fiber and resin can 


7-9

1 
to

 1
,5

00
 m

m

50
 to

 1
,5

00
 m

m

W
ef

t

Support Support

Silicone paper protector Warp

Polyethylene protector

Unidirectional reinforcement (tape) Fabric reinforcement

Figure 7-12. Dry fabric materials (top to bottom: aluminum 
lightning protection mess, Kevlar®, fiberglass, and carbon fiber).

Figure 7-11. Tape and fabric prepreg materials. 

be stored for a long time at room temperature. The composite 
can be cured at room temperature or an elevated temperature 
cure can be used to speed up the curing process and increase 
the strength. The disadvantage is that the process is messy 
and  reinforcement properties are less than prepreg material 
properties. [Figure 7-12]

Thixotropic Agents
Thixotropic agents are gel-like at rest but become fluid when 
agitated. These materials have high static shear strength and 
low dynamic shear strength at the same time to lose viscosity 
under stress.

Adhesives
Film Adhesives
Structural adhesives for aerospace applications are generally 
supplied as thin films supported on a release paper and 
stored under refrigerated conditions (–18 °C, or 0 °F). Film 
adhesives are available using high-temperature aromatic 

amine or catalytic curing agents with a wide range of 
flexibilizing and toughening agents. Rubber-toughened 
epoxy film adhesives are widely used in aircraft industry. 
The upper temperature limit of 121–177 °C (250–350 °F) 
is usually dictated by the degree of toughening required 
and by the overall choice of resins and curing agents. In 
general, toughening of a resin results in a lower usable 
service temperature. Film materials are frequently supported 
by fibers that serve to improve handling of the films prior 
to cure, control adhesive flow during bonding, and assist in 
bond line thickness control. Fibers can be incorporated as 
short-fiber mats with random orientation or as woven cloth. 
Commonly encountered fibers are polyesters, polyamides 
(nylon), and glass. Adhesives containing woven cloth may 
have slightly degraded environmental properties because of 
wicking of water by the fiber. Random mat scrim cloth is 
not as efficient for controlling film thickness as woven cloth 
because the unrestricted fibers move during bonding. Spun-
bonded nonwoven scrims do not move and are, therefore, 
widely used. [Figures 7-13 and 7-14] 

Paste Adhesives
Paste adhesives are used as an alternative to film adhesive. 
These are often used to secondary bond repair patches to 
damaged parts and also used in places where film adhesive 
is difficult to apply. Paste adhesives for structural bonding 
are made mostly from epoxy. One part and two part systems 
are available. The advantages of paste adhesives are that they 
can be stored at room temperature and have a long shelf life. 
The disadvantage is that the bondline thickness is hard to 
control, which affects the strength of the bond. A scrim cloth
can be used to maintain adhesive in the bondline when 
bonding patches with paste adhesive. [Figure 7-15]


7-10

BMS 5-154 05 film adhesive

Sanding PLY 120 fiberglass

BMS 5-154 GR 05 film adhesive

Carbon fabric 3K-70-PW at ±45

Figure 7-14. A roll of film adhesive. Figure 7-15. Two-part paste adhesive.

Figure 7-13. The use of film adhesive mess, Kevlar®, fiberglass, and carbon fiber.

Foaming Adhesives
Most foaming adhesives are 0.025-inch to 0.10-inch thick 
sheets of B staged epoxy. Foam adhesives cure at 250 °F or 
350 °F. During the cure cycle, the foaming adhesives expand. 
Foaming adhesives need to be stored in the freezer just like 
prepregs, and they have only a limited storage life. Foaming 
adhesives are used to splice pieces of honeycomb together 
in a sandwich construction and to bond repair plugs to the 
existing core during a prepreg repair. [Figure 7-16]

Description of Sandwich Structures
Theory A sandwich construction is a structural panel concept 
that consists in its simplest form of two relatively thin, 
parallel face sheets bonded to and separated by a relatively 
thick, lightweight core. The core supports the face sheets 
against buckling and resists out-of-plane shear loads. The 
core must have high shear strength and compression stiffness. 
Composite sandwich construction is most often fabricated 
using autoclave cure, press cure, or vacuum bag cure. Skin 


7-11

Foaming adhesive

Core splicing

Use in a repair

Prepreg skin

Honeycomb (or foam)

Adhesive film (optional)

Prepreg skin

Table 2

2t 4tt

Thickness

Flexural Strength

Weight

1.0

1.0

1.0

7.0

3.5

1.03

37.0

9.2

1.06

Solid
Material

Core 
Thickness

t

Core 
Thickness

3t

Figure 7-16. The use of foaming adhesives. 

Figure 7-17. Honeycomb sandwich construction.

Figure 7-18. Strength and stiffness of honeycomb sandwich material 
compared to a solid laminate.

Figure 7-19. Honeycomb core materials.

laminates may be precured and subsequently bonded to core, 
co-cured to core in one operation, or a combination of the 
two methods. Examples of honeycomb structure are: wing 
spoilers, fairings, ailerons, flaps, nacelles, floor boards, and 
rudders. [Figure 7-17]

Properties
Sandwich construction has high bending stiffness at 
minimal weight in comparison to aluminum and composite 
laminate construction. Most honeycombs are anisotropic; 
that is, properties are directional. Figure 7-18 illustrates 
the advantages of using a honeycomb construction. 
Increasing the core thickness greatly increases the stiffness 
of the honeycomb construction, while the weight increase 
is minimal. Due to the high stiffness of a honeycomb 
construction, it is not necessary to use external stiffeners, 
such as stringers and frames. [Figure 7-18]

Facing Materials
Most honeycomb structures used in aircraft construction have 
aluminum, fiberglass, Kevlar®, or carbon fiber face sheets. 
Carbon fiber face sheets cannot be used with aluminum 
honeycomb core material, because it causes the aluminum to 
corrode. Titanium and steel are used for specialty applications 
in high-temperature constructions. The face sheets of many 
components, such as spoilers and flight controls, are very 
thin—sometimes only 3 or 4 plies. Field reports have 
indicated that these face sheets do not have a good impact 
resistance.

Core Materials
Honeycomb
Each honeycomb material provides certain properties and 
has specific benefits. [Figure 7-19] The most common core 
material used for aircraft honeycomb structures is aramid 
paper (Nomex® or Korex®). Fiberglass is used for higher 
strength applications. 

• Kraft paper—relatively low strength, good insulating 
properties, is available in large quantities, and has a 
low cost.


7-12

Hexagonal Honeycomb Core

Overexpanded Core

Flexicore

Figure 7-20. Honeycomb density.

• Thermoplastics—good insulating properties, good 
energy absorption and/or redirection, smooth 
cell walls, moisture and chemical resistance, are 
environmentally compatible, aesthetically pleasing, 
and have a relatively low cost.

• Aluminum—best strength-to-weight ratio and 
energy absorption, has good heat transfer properties, 
electromagnetic shielding properties, has smooth, thin 
cell walls, is machinable, and has a relatively low cost.

• Steel—good heat transfer properties, electromagnetic 
shielding properties, and heat resistant.

• Specialty metals (titanium)—relatively high strength-
to-weight ratio, good heat transfer properties, chemical 
resistance, and heat resistant to very high temperatures.

• Aramid paper—flame resistant, fire retardant, good 
insulating properties, low dielectric properties, and 
good formability.

• Fiberglass—tailorable shear properties by layup, low 
dielectric properties, good insulating properties, and 
good formability.

• Carbon—good dimensional stability and retention, 
high-temperature property retention, high stiffness, 
very low coefficient of thermal expansion, tailorable 
thermal conductivity, relatively high shear modulus, 
and very expensive.

• Ceramics—heat resistant to very high temperatures, 
good insulating properties, is available in very small 
cell sizes, and very expensive. [Figure 7-19] 

Honeycomb core cells for aerospace applications are usually 
hexagonal. The cells are made by bonding stacked sheets 
at special locations. The stacked sheets are expanded to 
form hexagons. The direction parallel to the sheets is called  
ribbon direction.

Bisected hexagonal core has another sheet of material cutting 
across each hexagon. Bisected hexagonal honeycomb is 
stiffer and stronger than hexagonal core. Overexpanded core 
is made by expanding the sheets more than is needed to make 
hexagons. The cells of overexpanded core are rectangular. 
Overexpanded core is flexible perpendicular to the ribbon 
direction and is used in panels with simple curves. Bell-
shaped core, or flexicore, has curved cell walls, that make it 
flexible in all directions. Bell-shaped core is used in panels 
with complex curves.

Honeycomb core is available with different cell sizes. 
Small sizes provide better support for sandwich face sheets. 
Honeycomb is also available in different densities. Higher 
density core is stronger and stiffer than lower density core. 
[Figure 7-20] 

Foam
Foam cores are used on homebuilts and lighter aircraft to 
give strength and shape to wing tips, flight controls, fuselage 
sections, wings, and wing ribs. Foam cores are not commonly 
used on commercial type aircraft. Foams are typically heavier 
than honeycomb and not as strong. A variety of foams can 
be used as core material including: 

• Polystyrene (better known as styrofoam)—aircraft 
grade styrofoam with a tightly closed cell structure 
and no voids between cells; high compressive strength 
and good resistance to water penetration; can be cut 
with a hot wire to make airfoil shapes. 


7-13

• Phenolic—very good fire-resistant properties and can 
have very low density, but relatively low mechanical 
properties.

• Polyurethane—used for producing the fuselage, wing 
tips, and other curved parts of small aircraft; relatively 
inexpensive, fuel resistant, and compatible with most 
adhesives; do not use a hot wire to cut polyurethane 
foam;  easily contoured with a large knife and sanding 
equipment.

• Polypropylene—used to make airfoil shapes; can be 
cut with a hot wire; compatible with most adhesives 
and epoxy resins; not for use with polyester resins, 
dissolves in fuels and solvents.

• Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) (Divinycell, Klegecell, 
and Airex)—a closed cell medium- to high-density 
foam with high compression strength, durability, and 
excellent fire resistance; can be vacuum formed to 
compound shapes and be bent using heat; compatible 
with polyester, vinyl ester, and epoxy resins.

• Polymethacrylimide (Rohacell)—a closed-cell foam 
used for lightweight sandwich construction; excellent 
mechanical properties, high-dimensional stability 
under heat, good solvent resistance, and outstanding 
creep compression resistance; more expensive than 
the other types of foams, but has greater mechanical 
properties.

Balsa Wood
Balsa is a natural wood product with elongated closed cells; 
it is available in a variety of grades that correlate to the 
structural, cosmetic, and physical characteristics. The density 
of balsa is less than one-half of the density of conventional 
wood products. However, balsa has a considerably higher 
density than the other types of structural cores. 
 
Manufacturing and In-Service Damage
Manufacturing Defects
Manufacturing defects include:

• Delamination

• Resin starved areas

• Resin rich areas

• Blisters, air bubbles

• Wrinkles

• Voids

• Thermal decomposition

Manufacturing damage includes anomalies, such as porosity, 
microcracking, and delaminations resulting from processing 
discrepancies. It also includes such items as inadvertent 

edge cuts, surface gouges and scratches, damaged fastener 
holes, and impact damage. Examples of flaws occurring 
in manufacturing include a contaminated bondline surface 
or inclusions, such as prepreg backing paper or separation 
film, that is inadvertently left between plies during layup. 
Inadvertent (nonprocess) damage can occur in detail parts or 
components during assembly or transport or during operation. 

A part is resin rich if too much resin is used, for nonstructural 
applications this is not necessarily bad, but it adds weight. A 
part is called resin starved if too much resin is bled off during 
the curing process or if not enough resin is applied during 
the wet layup process. Resin-starved areas are indicated by 
fibers that show to the surface. The ratio of 60:40 fiber to 
resin ratio is considered optimum. Sources of manufacturing 
defects include:

• Improper cure or processing

• Improper machining

• Mishandling

• Improper drilling

• Tool drops

• Contamination

• Improper sanding

• Substandard material

• Inadequate tooling

• Mislocation of holes or details

Damage can occur at several scales within the composite 
material and structural configuration. This ranges from 
damage in the matrix and fiber to broken elements and failure 
of bonded or bolted attachments. The extent of damage 
controls repeated load life and residual strength and is critical 
to damage tolerance.

Fiber Breakage
Fiber breakage can be critical because structures are typically 
designed to be fiber dominant (i.e., fibers carry most of the 
loads). Fortunately, fiber failure is typically limited to a zone 
near the point of impact and is constrained by the impact 
object size and energy. Only a few of the service-related 
events listed in the previous section could lead to large areas 
of fiber damage.

Matrix Imperfections 
Matrix imperfections usually occur on the matrix-fiber 
interface or in the matrix parallel to the fibers. These 
imperfections can slightly reduce some of the material 
properties but are seldom critical to the structure, unless the 
matrix degradation is widespread. Accumulation of matrix 


7-14

cracks can cause the degradation of matrix-dominated 
properties. For laminates designed to transmit loads with their 
fibers (fiber dominant), only a slight reduction of properties 
is observed when the matrix is severely damaged. Matrix 
cracks, or microcracks, can significantly reduce properties 
dependent on the resin or the fiber-resin interface, such 
as interlaminar shear and compression strength. Micro-
cracking can have a very negative effect on properties of 
high-temperature resins. Matrix imperfections may develop 
into delaminations, which are a more critical type of damage.

Delamination and Debonds
Delaminations form on the interface between the layers in the 
laminate. Delaminations may form from matrix cracks that 
grow into the interlaminar layer or from low-energy impact. 
Debonds can also form from production nonadhesion along 
the bondline between two elements and initiate delamination 
in adjacent laminate layers. Under certain conditions, 
delaminations or debonds can grow when subjected to 
repeated loading and can cause catastrophic failure when 
the laminate is loaded in compression. The criticality of 
delaminations or debonds depend on:

• Dimensions.

• Number of delaminations at a given location.

• Location—in the thickness of laminate, in the 
structure, proximity to free edges, stress concentration 
region, geometrical discontinuities, etc.

• Loads—behavior of delaminations and debonds 
depend on loading type. They have little effect 
on the response of laminates loaded in tension. 
Under compression or shear loading, however, 
the sublaminates adjacent to the delaminations or 
debonded elements may buckle and cause a load 
redistribution mechanism that leads to structural 
failure. 

Combinations of Damages
In general, impact events cause combinations of damages. 
High-energy impacts by large objects (e.g., turbine blades) 
may lead to broken elements and failed attachments. The 
resulting damage may include significant fiber failure, matrix 
cracking, delamination, broken fasteners, and debonded 
elements. Damage caused by low-energy impact is more 
contained, but may also include a combination of broken 
fibers, matrix cracks, and multiple delaminations. 

Flawed Fastener Holes
Improper hole drilling, poor fastener installation, and missing 
fasteners may occur in manufacturing. Hole elongation can 
occur due to repeated load cycling in service. 

In-Service Defects
In-service defects include:

• Environmental degradation

• Impact damage

• Fatigue

• Cracks from local overload

• Debonding

• Delamination

• Fiber fracturing

• Erosion

Many honeycomb structures, such as wing spoilers, fairings, 
flight controls, and landing gear doors, have thin face 
sheets which have experienced durability problems that 
could be grouped into three categories: low resistance to 
impact, liquid ingression, and erosion. These structures have 
adequate stiffness and strength but low resistance to a service 
environment in which parts are crawled over, tools dropped, 
and service personnel are often unaware of the fragility of 
thin-skinned sandwich parts. Damages to these components, 
such as core crush, impact damages, and disbonds, are quite 
often easy to detect with a visual inspection due to their 
thin face sheets. However, they are sometimes overlooked 
or damaged by service personnel who do not want to delay 
aircraft departure or bring attention to their accidents, which 
might reflect poorly on their performance record. Therefore, 
damages are sometimes allowed to go unchecked, often 
resulting in growth of the damage due to liquid ingression 
into the core. Nondurable design details (e.g., improper core 
edge close-outs) also lead to liquid ingression.

The repair of parts due to liquid ingression can vary 
depending on the liquid, most commonly water or Skydrol 
(hydraulic fluid). Water tends to create additional damage in 
repaired parts when cured unless all moisture is removed from 
the part. Most repair material systems cure at temperatures 
above the boiling point of water, which can cause a disbond 
at the skin-to-core interface wherever trapped water resides. 
For this reason, core drying cycles are typically included prior 
to performing any repair. Some operators take the extra step 
of placing a damaged but unrepaired part in the autoclave to 
dry to preclude any additional damage from occurring during 
the cure of the repair. Skydrol presents a different problem. 
Once the core of a sandwich part is saturated, complete 
removal of Skydrol is almost impossible. The part continues 
to weep the liquid even in cure until bondlines can become 
contaminated and full bonding does not occur. Removal of 
contaminated core and adhesive as part of the repair is highly 
recommended. [Figure 7-21]


7-15

Figure 7-21. Damage to radome honeycomb sandwich structure.

Figure 7-22. Erosion damage to wingtip.

Erosion capabilities of composite materials have been 
known to be less than that of aluminum and, as a result, 
their application in leading-edge surfaces has been generally 
avoided. However, composites have been used in areas of 
highly complex geometry, but generally with an erosion 
coating. The durability and maintainability of some erosion 
coatings are less than ideal. Another problem, not as obvious 
as the first, is that edges of doors or panels can erode if they 
are exposed to the air stream. This erosion can be attributed 
to improper design or installation/fit-up. On the other hand, 
metal structures in contact or in the vicinity of these composite 
parts may show corrosion damage due to inappropriate choice 
of aluminum alloy, damaged corrosion sealant of metal parts 
during assembly or at splices, or insufficient sealant and/or 
lack of glass fabric isolation plies at the interfaces of spars, 
ribs, and fittings. [Figure 7-22] 

Corrosion
Many fiberglass and Kevlar® parts have a fine aluminum 
mesh for lightning protection. This aluminum mesh often 
corrodes around the bolt or screw holes. The corrosion affects 
the electrical bonding of the panel, and the aluminum mesh 
needs to be removed and new mesh installed to restore the 
electrical bonding of the panel. [Figure 7-23]

Ultraviolet (UV) light affects the strength of composite 
materials. Composite structures need to be protected by a 
top coating to prevent the effects of UV light. Special UV 
primers and paints have been developed to protect composite 
materials.
 
Nondestructive Inspection (NDI) of 
Composites
Visual Inspection
A visual inspection is the primary inspection method for in-
service inspections. Most types of damage scorch, stain, dent, 
penetrate, abrade, or chip the composite surface, making the 
damage visible. Once damage is detected, the affected area 
needs to be inspected closer using flashlights, magnifying 
glasses, mirrors, and borescopes. These tools are used to 
magnify defects that otherwise might not be seen easily 
and to allow visual inspection of areas that are not readily 
accessible. Resin starvation, resin richness, wrinkles, ply 
bridging, discoloration (due to overheating, lightning strike, 
etc.), impact damage by any cause, foreign matter, blisters, 
and disbonding are some of the discrepancies that can be 
detected with a visual inspection. Visual inspection cannot 
find internal flaws in the composite, such as delaminations, 
disbonds, and matrix crazing. More sophisticated NDI 
techniques are needed to detect these types of defects.


7-16

Tap hammer

Panel surface
38 mm

(1.50 in)
(approximately)

25 – 38 mm
(1.00 – 1.50 in)
(approximately)

Figure 7-23. Corrosion of aluminum lightning protection mesh.

Figure 7-24. Tap test with tap hammer. 

Audible Sonic Testing (Coin Tapping) 
Sometimes referred to as audio, sonic, or coin tap, this 
technique makes use of frequencies in the audible range 
(10 Hz to 20 Hz). A surprisingly accurate method in the hands 
of experienced personnel, tap testing is perhaps the most 
common technique used for the detection of delamination 
and/or disbond. The method is accomplished by tapping 
the inspection area with a solid round disk or lightweight 
hammer-like device and listening to the response of the 
structure to the hammer. [Figure 7-24] A clear, sharp, ringing 
sound is indicative of a well-bonded solid structure, while a 
dull or thud-like sound indicates a discrepant area. 

The tapping rate needs to be rapid enough to produce enough 
sound for any difference in sound tone to be discernable to the 
ear. Tap testing is effective on thin skin to stiffener bondlines, 
honeycomb sandwich with thin face sheets, or even near  
the surface of thick laminates, such as rotorcraft blade  

supports. Again, inherent in the method is the possibility 
that changes within the internal elements of the structure 
might produce pitch changes that are interpreted as defects, 
when in fact they are present by design. This inspection 
should be accomplished in as quiet an area as possible and 
by experienced personnel familiar with the part’s internal 
configuration. This method is not reliable for structures with 
more than four plies. It is often used to map out the damage 
on thin honeycomb facesheets. [Figure 7-24]

Automated Tap Test
This test is very similar to the manual tap test except that a 
solenoid is used instead of a hammer. The solenoid produces 
multiple impacts in a single area. The tip of the impactor 
has a transducer that records the force versus time signal 
of the impactor. The magnitude of the force depends on the 
impactor, the impact energy, and the mechanical properties 
of the structure. The impact duration (period) is not sensitive 


7-17

0   1    2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9   10

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0   1    2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9   10

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Through transmission
ultrasonic (TTU) hand held

Pulse echo–normal

Pulse echo–delamination

DEPTH

SIGNAL
STRENGTH

DEPTH

SIGNAL
STRENGTH

Through transmission
ultrasonic (TTU) water yoke

Figure 7-25. Ultrasonic testing methods.

to the magnitude of the impact force; however, this duration 
changes as the stiffness of the structure is altered. Therefore, 
the signal from an unflawed region is used for calibration, 
and any deviation from this unflawed signal indicates the 
existence of damage. 
 
Ultrasonic Inspection
Ultrasonic inspection has proven to be a very useful tool 
for the detection of internal delaminations, voids, or 
inconsistencies in composite components not otherwise 
discernable using visual or tap methodology. There are many 
ultrasonic techniques; however, each technique uses sound 
wave energy with a frequency above the audible range. 
[Figure 7-25] A high-frequency (usually several MHz) sound 
wave is introduced into the part and may be directed to travel 
normal to the part surface, or along the surface of the part, or 
at some predefined angle to the part surface. You may need 
to try different directions to locate the flow. The introduced 
sound is then monitored as it travels its assigned route through 
the part for any significant change. Ultrasonic sound waves 
have properties similar to light waves. When an ultrasonic 
wave strikes an interrupting object, the wave or energy is 
either absorbed or reflected back to the surface. The disrupted 
or diminished sonic energy is then picked up by a receiving 
transducer and converted into a display on an oscilloscope or 
a chart recorder. The display allows the operator to evaluate 

the discrepant indications comparatively with those areas 
known to be good. To facilitate the comparison, reference 
standards are established and utilized to calibrate the 
ultrasonic equipment. 

The repair technician must realize that the concepts outlined 
here work fine in the repetitious manufacturing environment, 
but are likely to be more difficult to implement in a repair 
environment given the vast number of different composite 
components installed on the aircraft and the relative 
complexity of their construction. The reference standards 
would also have to take into account the transmutations that 
take place when a composite component is exposed to an 
in-service environment over a prolonged period or has been 
the subject of repair activity or similar restorative action. The 
four most common ultrasonic techniques are discussed next.

Through Transmission Ultrasonic Inspection
Through transmission ultrasonic inspection uses two 
transducers, one on each side of the area to be inspected. The 
ultrasonic signal is transmitted from one transducer to the 
other transducer. The loss of signal strength is then measured 
by the instrument. The instrument shows the loss as a percent 
of the original signal strength or the loss in decibels. The signal 
loss is compared to a reference standard. Areas with a greater 
loss than the reference standard indicate a defective area.

 


7-18

Figure 7-26. Pulse echo test equipment.

Figure 7-27. Bond tester.

Figure 7-28. Phased array testing equipment.

Pulse Echo Ultrasonic Inspection
Single-side ultrasonic inspection may be accomplished using 
pulse echo techniques. In this method, a single search unit is 
working as a transmitting and a receiving transducer that is 
excited by high voltage pulses. Each electrical pulse activates 
the transducer element. This element converts the electrical 
energy into mechanical energy in the form of an ultrasonic 
sound wave. The sonic energy travels through a Teflon® or 
methacrylate contact tip into the test part. A waveform is 
generated in the test part and is picked up by the transducer 
element. Any change in amplitude of the received signal, 
or time required for the echo to return to the transducer, 
indicates the presence of a defect. Pulse echo inspections 
are used to find delaminations, cracks, porosity, water, and 
disbonds of bonded components. Pulse echo does not find 
disbonds or defects between laminated skins and honeycomb 
core. [Figure 7-26]

Ultrasonic Bondtester Inspection
Low-frequency and high-frequency bondtesters are used 
for ultrasonic inspections of composite structures. These 
bondtesters use an inspection probe that has one or two 
transducers. The high-frequency bondtester is used to 
detect delaminations and voids. It cannot detect a skin-to-
honeycomb core disbond or porosity. It can detect defects as 
small as 0.5-inch in diameter. The low-frequency bondtester 
uses two transducers and is used to detect delamination, 
voids, and skin to honeycomb core disbands. This inspection 
method does not detect which side of the part is damaged, and 
cannot detect defects smaller than 1.0-inch. [Figure 7-27]

Phased Array Inspection
Phased array inspection is one of the latest ultrasonic 
instruments to detect flaws in composite structures. It 
operates under the same principle of operation as pulse echo, 
but it uses 64 sensors at the same time, which speeds up the 
process. [Figure 7-28]

Radiography
Radiography, often referred to as X-ray, is a very useful 
NDI method because it essentially allows a view into the 
interior of the part. This inspection method is accomplished 
by passing X-rays through the part or assembly being tested 
while recording the absorption of the rays onto a film sensitive 


7-19

Figure 7-29. Moisture tester equipment.

to X-rays. The exposed film, when developed, allows the 
inspector to analyze variations in the opacity of the exposure 
recorded onto the film, in effect creating a visualization of 
the relationship of the component’s internal details. Since the 
method records changes in total density through its thickness, 
it is not a preferred method for detecting defects such as 
delaminations that are in a plane that is normal to the ray 
direction. It is a most effective method, however, for detecting 
flaws parallel to the X-ray beam’s centerline. Internal 
anomalies, such as delaminations in the corners, crushed core, 
blown core, water in core cells, voids in foam adhesive joints, 
and relative position of internal details, can readily be seen 
via radiography. Most composites are nearly transparent to 
X-rays, so low energy rays must be used. Because of safety 
concerns, it is impractical to use around aircraft. Operators 
should always be protected by sufficient lead shields, as the 
possibility of exposure exists either from the X-ray tube or 
from scattered radiation. Maintaining a minimum safe distance 
from the X-ray source is always essential.
 
Thermography
Thermal inspection comprises all methods in which heat-
sensing devices are used to measure temperature variations 
for parts under inspection. The basic principle of thermal 
inspection consists of measuring or mapping of surface 
temperatures when heat flows from, to, or through a test 
object. All thermographic techniques rely on differentials 
in thermal conductivity between normal, defect free areas, 
and those having a defect. Normally, a heat source is used 
to elevate the temperature of the part being examined while 
observing the surface heating effects. Because defect free 
areas conduct heat more efficiently than areas with defects, 
the amount of heat that is either absorbed or reflected 
indicates the quality of the bond. The type of defects that 
affect the thermal properties include debonds, cracks, impact 
damage, panel thinning, and water ingress into composite 
materials and honeycomb core. Thermal methods are most 
effective for thin laminates or for defects near the surface.

Neutron Radiography
Neutron radiography is a nondestructive imaging technique 
that is capable of visualizing the internal characteristics of 
a sample. The transmission of neutrons through a medium 
is dependent upon the neutron cross sections for the nuclei 
in the medium. Differential attenuation of neutrons through 
a medium may be measured, mapped, and then visualized. 
The resulting image may then be utilized to analyze the 
internal characteristics of the sample. Neutron radiography 
is a complementary technique to X-ray radiography. Both 
techniques visualize the attenuation through a medium. 
The major advantage of neutron radiography is its ability to 
reveal light elements such as hydrogen found in corrosion 
products and water.

Moisture Detector 
A moisture meter can be used to detect water in sandwich 
honeycomb structures. A moisture meter measures the radio 
frequency (RF) power loss caused by the presence of water. 
The moisture meter is often used to detect moisture in nose 
radomes. [Figure 7-29] Figure 7-30 provides a comparison 
of NDI testing equipment.

Composite Repairs
Layup Materials
Hand Tools
Prepreg and dry fabrics can be cut with hand tools, such 
as scissors, pizza cutters, and knives. Materials made from 
Kevlar® are more difficult to cut than fiberglass or carbon 
and tools wear quicker. A squeegee and a brush are used 
to impregnate dry fibers with resin for wet layup. Markers, 
rulers, and circle templates are used to make a repair layout.
[Figure 7-31]

Air Tools
Air-driven power tools, such as drill motors, routers, and 
grinders, are used for composite materials. Electric motors 
are not recommended, because carbon is a conductive 
material that can cause an electrical short circuit. If electric 
tools are used, they need to be of the totally enclosed type. 
[Figure 7-32] 


7-20

Method of
Inspection Disbond Delamination Dent HoleCrack Water

Ingestion
Overheat
and Burns

Lightning
Strike

X (1)
X (1)
X

X
X (2)
X (3)

X (3)

X (1)
X (1)
X
X
X
X (2)
X (3)

X (3)

X

X

X

X
X (1)

X (4)
X (4)

X X X XVisual
X-Ray
Ultrasonic TTU
Ultrasonic pulse echo
Ultrasonic bondtester
Tap test
Infrared thermography
Dye penetrant
Eddy current
Shearography

Type of Defect

Notes: (1)   For defects that open to the surface
                (2)   For thin structure (3 plies or less)
                 (3)   The procedures for this type of inspection are being developed
 (4)   This procedure is not recommended  

Figure 7-30. Comparison of NDI testing equipment.

Figure 7-31. Hand tools for layup.
Figure 7-32. Air tools used for composite repair.

Caul Plate 
A caul plate made from aluminum is often used to support the 
part during the cure cycle. A mold release agent, or parting 
film, is applied to the caul plate so that the part does not attach 
to the caul plate. A thin caul plate is also used on top of the 
repair when a heat bonder is used. The caul plate provides a 
more uniform heated area and it leaves a smoother finish of 
the composite laminate.

Support Tooling and Molds
Certain repairs require tools to support the part and/or maintain 
surface contour during cure. A variety of materials can be used 
to manufacture these tools. The type of material depends on the 
type of repair, cure temperature, and whether it is a temporary 
or permanent tool. Support tooling is necessary for oven and 
autoclave cure due to the high cure temperature. The parts 

deform if support tooling is not used. There are many types 
of tooling material available. Some are molded to a specific 
part contour and others are used as rigid supports to maintain 
the contour during cure. Plaster is an inexpensive and easy 
material for contour tooling. It can be filled with fiberglass, 
hemp, or other material. Plaster is not very durable, but can be 
used for temporary tools. Often, a layer of fiberglass-reinforced 
epoxy is placed on the tool side surface to improve the finish 
quality. Tooling resins are used to impregnate fiberglass, 
carbon fiber, or other reinforcements to make permanent 
tools. Complex parts are made from metal or high-temperature 
tooling boards that are machined with 5-axis CNC equipment 
to make master tools that can be used to fabricate aircraft parts. 
[Figures 7-33 and 7-34]


7-21

Figure 7-33. Five-axis CNC equipment for tool and mold making.

Figure 7-34.  A mold of an inlet duct.

Vacuum Bag Materials 
Repairs of composite aircraft components are often performed 
with a technique known as vacuum bagging. A plastic bag is 
sealed around the repair area. Air is then removed from the 
bag, which allows repair plies to be drawn together with no 
air trapped in between. Atmospheric pressure bears on the 
repair and a strong, secure bond is created.

Several processing materials are used for vacuum bagging 
a part. These materials do not become part of the repair and 
are discarded after the repair process.

Release Agents
Release agents, also called mold release agents, are used so 
that the part comes off the tool or caul plate easily after curing. 

Bleeder Ply
The bleeder ply creates a path for the air and volatiles to 
escape from the repair. Excess resin is collected in the 
bleeder. Bleeder material could be made of a layer of 
fiberglass, nonwoven polyester, or it could be a perforated 
Teflon® coated material. The structural repair manual 
(SRM) indicates what type and how many plies of bleeder 
are required. As a general rule, the thicker the laminate, the 
more bleeder plies are required.

Peel Ply
Peel plies are often used to create a clean surface for bonding 
purposes. A thin layer of fiberglass is cured with the repair 
part. Just before the part is bonded to another structure, the 
peel ply is removed. The peel ply is easy to remove and leaves 
a clean surface for bonding. Peel plies are manufactured 
from polyester, nylon, flouronated ethylene propylene (FEP), 
or coated fiberglass. They can be difficult to remove if 
overheated. Some coated peel plies can leave an undesirable 
contamination on the surface. The preferred peel ply material 
is polyester that has been heat-set to eliminate shrinkage.

Layup Tapes
Vacuum bag sealing tape, also called sticky tape, is used to 
seal the vacuum bag to the part or tool. Always check the 
temperature rating of the tape before use to ensure that you 
use appropriately rated tape.

Perforated Release Film
Perforated parting film is used to allow air and volatiles out 
of the repair, and it prevents the bleeder ply from sticking to 
the part or repair. It is available with different size holes and 
hole spacing depending on the amount of bleeding required.

Solid Release Film
Solid release films are used so that the prepreg or wet layup 
plies do not stick to the working surface or caul plate. Solid 
release film is also used to prevent the resins from bleeding 
through and damaging the heat blanket or caul plate if they 
are used.

Breather Material
The breather material is used to provide a path for air to 
get out of the vacuum bag. The breather must contact the 
bleeder. Typically, polyester is used in either 4-ounce or 
10-ounce weights. Four ounces is used for applications below 
50 pounds per square inch (psi) and 10 ounces is used for 
50–100 psi.


7-22

Figure 7-35. Bagging materials.

Figure 7-36. Bagging of complex part.

Figure 7-37. Self-sealing vacuum bag with heater element.

Vacuum Bag 
The vacuum bag material provides a tough layer between 
the repair and the atmosphere. The vacuum bag material 
is available in different temperature ratings, so make sure 
that the material used for the repair can handle the cure 
temperature. Most vacuum bag materials are one time use, 
but material made from flexible silicon rubber is reusable. 
Two small cuts are made in the bagging material so that the 
vacuum probe valve can be installed. The vacuum bag is not 
very flexible and plies need to be made in the bag if complex 
shapes are to be bagged. Sometimes, an envelope type bag is 
used, but the disadvantage of this method is that the vacuum 
pressure might crush the part. Reusable bags made from 
silicon rubber are available that are more flexible. Some 
have a built-in heater blanket that simplifies the bagging 
task. [Figures 7-35, 7-36, and 7-37]

Vacuum Equipment
A vacuum pump is used to evacuate air and volatiles from 
the vacuum bag so that atmospheric pressure consolidates 
the plies. A dedicated vacuum pump is used in a repair shop. 
For repairs on the aircraft, a mobile vacuum pump could 
be used. Most heat bonders have a built-in vacuum pump. 
Special air hoses are used as vacuum lines, because regular air 
hoses might collapse when a vacuum is applied. The vacuum 
lines that are used in the oven or autoclave need to be able 
to withstand the high temperatures in the heating device. A 
vacuum pressure regulator is sometimes used to lower the 
vacuum pressure during the bagging process.

Vacuum Compaction Table
A vacuum compaction table is a convenient tool for debulking 
composite layups with multiple plies. Essentially a reusable 
vacuum bag, a compaction table consists of a metal table 
surface with a hinged cover. The cover includes a solid frame, 
a flexible membrane, and a vacuum seal. Repair plies are laid 
up on the table surface and sealed beneath the cover with 

vacuum to remove entrapped air. Some compaction tables 
are heated but most are not.

Heat Sources 
Oven
Composite materials can be cured in ovens using various 
pressure application methods. [Figure 7-38] Typically, 
vacuum bagging is used to remove volatiles and trapped air 
and utilizes atmospheric pressure for consolidation. Another 
method of pressure application for oven cures is the use of 
shrink wrapping or shrink tape. The oven uses heated air 
circulated at high speed to cure the material system. Typical 
oven cure temperatures are 250 °F and 350 °F. Ovens have 
a temperature sensor to feed temperature data back to the 


7-23

Figure 7-38. Walk-in curing oven.

Figure 7-39. Autoclave.

oven controller. The oven temperature can differ from the 
actual part temperature depending upon the location of the 
oven sensor and the location of the part in the oven. The 
thermal mass of the part in the oven is generally greater  
than the surrounding oven and during rise to temperature, 
the part temperature can lag the oven temperature by a 
considerable amount. To deal with these differences, at least 
two thermocouples must be placed on the part and connected 
to a temperature-sensing device (separate chart recorder, hot 
bonder, etc.) located outside the oven. Some oven controllers 
can be controlled by thermocouples placed on the repair part. 

Autoclave
An autoclave system allows a complex chemical reaction to 
occur inside a pressure vessel according to a specified time, 

temperature, and pressure profile in order to process a variety 
of materials. [Figure 7-39] The evolution of materials and 
processes has taken autoclave operating conditions from 
120 °C (250 °F) and 275 kPa (40 psi) to well over 760 °C 
(1,400 °F) and 69,000 kPa (10,000 psi). Autoclaves that 
are operated at lower temperatures and pressures can be 
pressurized by air, but if higher temperatures and pressures 
are required for the cure cycle, a 50/50 mixture of air and 
nitrogen or 100 percent nitrogen should be used to reduce 
the change of an autoclave fire. 

The major elements of an autoclave system are a vessel to 
contain pressure, sources to heat the gas stream and circulate 
it uniformly within the vessel, a subsystem to apply vacuum 
to parts covered by a vacuum bag, a subsystem to control 
operating parameters, and a subsystem to load the molds into 
the autoclave. Modern autoclaves are computer controlled 
and the operator can write and monitor all types of cure cycle 
programs. The most accurate way to control the cure cycle is 
to control the autoclave controller with thermocouples that 
are placed on the actual part. 

Most parts processed in autoclaves are covered with a vacuum 
bag that is used primarily for compaction of laminates and to 
provide a path for removal of volatiles. The bag allows the 
part to be subjected to differential pressure in the autoclave 
without being directly exposed to the autoclave atmosphere. 
The vacuum bag is also used to apply varying levels of 
vacuum to the part. 

Heat Bonder and Heat Lamps
Typical on-aircraft heating methods include electrical 
resistance heat blankets, infrared heat lamps, and hot air 
devices. All heating devices must be controlled by some 
means so that the correct amount of heat can be applied. This 
is particularly important for repairs using prepreg material 
and adhesives, because controlled heating and cooling rates 
are usually prescribed.


7-24

Figure 7-40. Heat bonder equipment.

Figure 7-41. Heat blankets. Figure 7-42. Heat press.

Heat Bonder

A heat bonder is a portable device that automatically controls 
heating based on temperature feedback from the repair area. 
Heat bonders also have a vacuum pump that supplies and 
monitors the vacuum in the vacuum bag. The heat bonder 
controls the cure cycle with thermocouples that are placed 
near the repair. Some repairs require up to 10 thermocouples. 
Modern heat bonders can run many different types of cure 
programs and cure cycle data can be printed out or uploaded 
to a computer. [Figure 7-40]

Heat Blanket

A heat blanket is a flexible heater. It is made of two layers 
of silicon rubber with a metal resistance heater between the 
two layers of silicon. Heat blankets are a common method 
of applying heat for repairs on the aircraft. Heat blankets 
may be controlled manually; however, they are usually used 
in conjunction with a heat bonder. Heat is transferred from 
the blanket via conduction. Consequently, the heat blanket 
must conform to and be in 100 percent contact with the part, 
which is usually accomplished using vacuum bag pressure. 
[Figure 7-41]

Heat Lamp

Infrared heat lamps can also be used for elevated temperature 
curing of composites if a vacuum bag is not utilized. 
However, they are generally not effective for producing 
curing temperatures above 150 °F, or for areas larger than two 
square feet. It is also difficult to control the heat applied with 
a lamp, and lamps tend to generate high-surface temperatures 
quickly. If controlled by thermostats, heat lamps can be useful 
in applying curing heat to large or irregular surfaces. Heat 
bonders can be used to control heat lamps.

Hot Air System

Hot air systems can be used to cure composite repairs, and 
are mainly restricted to small repairs and for drying the repair 
area. A heat generator supplies hot air that is directed into an 
insulated enclosure set up around the repair area after vacuum 
bagging has been deployed. The hot air surrounds the repair 
for even temperature rise.

Heat Press Forming
During the press forming process, flat stacked thermoplastic 
prepreg is heated to above melt temperature (340–430 °C, 
or 645–805 °F) in an oven, rapidly (1–10 seconds) shuttled 
to a forming die, pressed to shape, and consolidated and 
cooled under pressure (700–7,000 kPa, or 100–1,000 psi). 
[Figure 7-42] In production, press forming dies usually are 
matched male-female sets constructed of steel or aluminum. 
However, rubber, wood, phenolics, and so on can be used 
during prototyping. The die set can be maintained at room 
temperature throughout the forming-consolidation cycle. 
But, the use of a hot die (120–200 °C, or 250–390 °F) allows 
control of the cooling-down rate (avoiding part warpage and 
controlling morphology in semicrystalline thermoplastic 
prepreg, such as PEEK and polyphenylene sulfide) and 
extends the forming window promoting better ply slip. 


7-25

The main disadvantage with this method is that the press only 
applies pressure in one direction, and hence, it is difficult to 
make complex-shaped (e.g., beads, closed corners) parts or 
parts with legs that approach vertical. Since the temperature 
of the die set need not be cycled with each part, rapid forming 
times of between 10 minutes and 2 hours are achievable with 
press forming. 

Thermocouples
A thermocouple (TC) is a thermoelectric device used to 
accurately measure temperatures. It may be connected to 
a simple temperature reading device, or connected to a hot 
bonder, oven, or other type of controller that regulates the 
amount of heat. TCs consist of a wire with two leads of 
dissimilar metals that are joined at one end. Heating the 
joint produces an electric current, which is converted to a 
temperature reading with a TC monitor. Select the type of 
wire (J or K) and the type of connector that are compatible 
with the local temperature monitoring equipment (hot bonder, 
oven, autoclave, etc.). TC wire is available with different 
types of insulation; check the manufacturer’s product data 
sheets to ensure the insulation withstands the highest cure 
temperature. Teflon-insulated wire is generally good for 
390 °F and lower cures; Kapton-insulated wire should be 
used for higher temperatures.

Thermocouple Placement

Thermocouple placement is the key in obtaining proper 
cure temperatures throughout the repair. In general, the 
thermocouples used for temperature control should be placed 
as close as possible to the repair material without causing it 
to become embedded in the repair or producing indentations 
in the repair. They should also be placed in strategic hot or 
cold locations to ensure the materials are adequately cured 
but not exposed to excessively high temperatures that could 
degrade the material structural properties. The thermocouples 
should be placed as close as practical to the area that needs 
to be monitored. The following steps should be taken when 
using thermocouples:

•  Never use fewer than three thermocouples to monitor 
a heating cycle. 

• If bonding a precured patch, place the thermocouple 
near the center of the patch.

• A control thermocouple may be centered over a 
low-temperature (200 °F or lower) co-cured patch as 
long as it is placed on top of a thin metallic sheet to 
prevent a thermocouple indentation onto the patch. 
This may allow for a more accurate control of the 
patch temperature.

• The thermocouples installed around the perimeter 
of the repair patch should be placed approximately 
0.5-inch away from the edge of the adhesive line. 

• Place flash tape below and above the thermocouple 
tips to protect them from resin flash and to protect the 
control unit from electrical shorts. 

• Do not place the thermocouple under the vacuum 
port as the pressure may damage the lead and cause 
erroneous readings to occur.

• Do not place thermocouple wires adjacent to or 
crossing the heat blanket power cord to prevent 
erroneous temperature readings caused by magnetic 
flux lines.

• Do not place any control thermocouple beyond the 
heat blanket’s two-inch overlap of the repair to prevent 
the controller from trying to compensate for the lower 
temperature. 

• Always leave slack in the thermocouple wire under the 
vacuum bag to prevent the thermocouple from being 
pulled away from the area to be monitored as vacuum 
is applied.

Thermal Survey of Repair Area

In order to achieve maximum structural bonded composite 
repair, it is essential to cure these materials within the 
recommended temperature range. Failure to cure at the correct 
temperatures can produce weak patches and/or bonding 
surfaces and can result in a repair failure during service. A 
thermal survey should be performed prior to installing the 
repair to ensure proper and uniform temperatures can be 
achieved. The thermal survey determines the heating and 
insulation requirements, as well as TC locations for the repair 
area. The thermal survey is especially useful for determining 
the methods of heating (hot air modules, heat lamps, heat 
blanket method and monitoring requirements in cases where 
heat sinks (substructure for instance) exist in the repair area). 
It should be performed for all types of heating methods to 
preclude insufficient, excessive, or uneven heating of the 
repair area. 

Temperature Variations in Repair Zone

Thermal variations in the repair area occur for many reasons. 
Primary among these are material type, material thickness, 
and underlying structure in the repair zone. For these reasons, 
it is important to know the structural composition of the 
area to be repaired. Substructure existing in the repair zone 
conducts heat away from the repair area, resulting in a cold 
spot directly above the structure. Thin skins heat quickly 
and can easily be overheated. Thick skin sections absorb 
heat slowly and take longer to reach soak temperature. The 
thermal survey identifies these problem areas and allows the 
technician to develop the heat and insulation setup required 
for even heating of the repair area.


7-26

Insulate due to
rib heat sink

300 °F Temperature Dwell

Constant-watt- 
density heat blanket

Bonded stringer

Patch perimeter

Rib

240°

250°

2-INCH MIN

2-INCH MIN

200° 200°

280°

290°

300°
260°

Figure 7-43. Thermal survey example.

Thermal Survey

During the thermal survey process, try to determine possible 
hot and cold areas in the repair zone. Temporarily attach a 
patch of the same material and thickness, several thermal 
couples, heating blanket, and a vacuum bag to the repair 
area. Heat the area and, after the temperature is stabilized, 
record the thermocouple temperatures. Add insulation if the 
temperature of the thermocouple varies more than 10 degrees 
from average. The areas with a stringer and rib indicate a 
lower temperature than the middle of the patch because they 
act as a heat sink. Add insulation to these areas to increase 
the temperature. [Figure 7-43] 

Solutions to Heat Sink Problems

Additional insulation can be placed over the repair area. 
This insulation can also be extended beyond the repair area 
to minimize heat being conducted away. Breather materials 
and fiberglass cloths work well, either on top of the vacuum 
bag or within the vacuum bag or on the accessible backside 
of the structure. Place more insulation over cool spots and 
less insulation over hot spots. If access is available to the 
backside of the repair area, additional heat blankets could be 
placed there to heat the repair area more evenly.

Types of Layups
Wet Layups 
During the wet layup process, a dry fabric is impregnated with 
a resin. Mix the resin system just before making the repair. 
Lay out the repair plies on a piece of fabric and impregnate 
the fabric with the resin. After the fabric is impregnated, 
cut the repair plies, stack in the correct ply orientation, and 
vacuum bag. Wet layup repairs are often used with fiberglass 
for nonstructural applications. Carbon and Kevlar® dry fabric 
could also be used with a wet layup resin system. Many resin 
systems used with wet layup cure at room temperature, are 
easy to accomplish, and the materials can be stored at room 
temperature for long period of times. The disadvantage of 
room temperature wet layup is that it does not restore the 
strength and durability of the original structure and parts 
that were cured at 250 °F or 350 °F during manufacturing. 
Some wet layup resins use an elevated temperature cure and 
have improved properties. In general, wet layup properties 
are less than properties of prepreg material.
   
Epoxy resins may require refrigeration until they are used. 
This prevents the aging of the epoxy. The label on the 
container states the correct storage temperature for each 
component. The typical storage temperature is between 40 °F 
and 80 °F for most epoxy resins. Some resin systems require 
storage below 40 °F.


7-27

Begin 
cure

Mechanical life

Recommended 
handling lifeStorage life

Shipment date Removed from 
refrigeration

Complete
layup

Figure 7-44. Walk-in freezer for storing prepreg materials.

Figure 7-45. Storage life for prepreg materials.

Prepreg
Prepreg is a fabric or tape that is impregnated with a resin 
during the manufacturing process. The resin system is 
already mixed and is in the B stage cure. Store the prepreg 
material in a freezer below 0 °F to prevent further curing 
of the resin. The material is typically placed on a roll and a 
backing material is placed on one side of the material so that 
the prepreg does not stick together. The prepreg material is 
sticky and adheres to other plies easily during the stack-up 
process. You must remove the prepreg from the freezer and 
let the material thaw, which might take 8 hours for a full 
roll. Store the prepreg materials in a sealed, moisture proof 
bag. Do not open these bags until the material is completely 
thawed, to prevent contamination of the material by moisture. 

After the material is thawed and removed from the backing 
material, cut it in repair plies, stack in the correct ply 
orientation, and vacuum bag. Do not forget to remove the 
backing material when stacking the plies. Cure prepregs at 
an elevated cure cycle; the most common temperatures used 
are 250 °F and 350 °F. Autoclaves, curing ovens, and heat 
bonders can be used to cure the prepreg material.

Consolidation is necessary if parts are made from several 
layers of prepreg, because large quantities of air can be 
trapped between each prepreg layer. Remove this trapped air 
by covering the prepreg with a perforated release film and a 
breather ply, and apply a vacuum bag. Apply the vacuum for 
10 to 15 minutes at room temperature. Typically, attach the 
first consolidated ply to the tool face and repeat this process 
after every 3 or 5 layers depending on the prepreg thickness 
and component shape.

Store prepreg, film adhesive, and foaming adhesives in 
a freezer at a temperature below 0 °F. If these types of 
materials need to be shipped, place them in special containers 
filled with dry ice. The freezer must not be of the automatic 
defrost type; the auto-defrost cycle periodically warms the 
inside of the freezer, which can reduce the shelf life and 
consume the allowable out-time of the composite material. 
Freezers must be capable of maintaining 0 °F or below; 
most household freezers meet this level. Walk-in freezers 
can be used for large volume cold storage. If usage is small, 
a chest-type freezer may suffice. Refrigerators are used to 
store laminating and paste adhesives and should be kept near 
40 °F. [Figure 7-44]

Uncured prepreg materials have time limits for storage and 
use. [Figure 7-45] The maximum time allowed for storing 
of a prepreg at low temperature is called the storage life, 
which is typically 6 months to a year. The material can be 
tested, and the storage life could be extended by the material 
manufacturer. The maximum time allowed for material at 

room temperature before the material cures is called the 
mechanical life. The recommended time at room temperature 
to complete layup and compaction is called the handling 
life. The handling life is shorter than the mechanical life. 
The mechanical life is measured from the time the material 
is removed from the freezer until the time the material is 
returned to the freezer. The operator must keep records of 
the time in and out of the freezer. Material that exceeds the 
mechanical life needs to be discarded.

Many repair facilities cut the material in smaller kits and 
store them in moisture-proof bags that thaw quicker when 
removed from the freezer. This also limits the time out of 
the freezer for a big roll.

All frozen prepreg materials need to be stored in moisture-
proof bag to avoid moisture contamination. All prepreg 
material should be protected from dust, oil, vapors, smoke, 
and other contaminants. A clean room for repair layup would 
be best, but if a clean room is not available, the prepreg should 
be protected by storing them in bags or keeping them covered 
with plastic. Before starting the layup, cover the unprotected 
sides of the prepreg with parting film, and clean the area 
being repaired immediately before laying up the repair plies.


7-28

Warp

P EXTRA
0

P2
45

P3
0

P1
0

F.P.

Ply locating template

Taper sanded repair

Repair plies

Part zero direction

Figure 7-46. Repair layup process.

Prepreg material is temperature sensitive. Excessively 
high temperatures cause the material to begin curing, and 
excessively low temperatures make the material difficult 
to handle. For repairs on aircraft in very cold or very hot 
climates, the area should be protected by a tent around the 
repair area. Prepare the prepreg repair plies in a controlled-
temperature environment and bring them to the repair area 
immediately before using them. 

Co-curing
Co-curing is a process wherein two parts are simultaneously 
cured. The interface between the two parts may or may not 
have an adhesive layer. Co-curing often results in poor panel 
surface quality, which is prevented by using a secondary 
surfacing material co-cured in the standard cure cycle or 
a subsequent fill-and-fair operation. Co-cured skins may 
also have poorer mechanical properties, requiring the use of 
reduced design values.

A typical co-cure application is the simultaneous cure of a 
stiffener and a skin. Adhesive film is frequently placed into 
the interface between the stiffener and the skin to increase 
fatigue and peel resistance. Principal advantages derived 
from the co-cure process are excellent fit between bonded 
components and guaranteed surface cleanliness.

Secondary Bonding
Secondary bonding utilizes precured composite detail parts, 
and uses a layer of adhesive to bond two precured composite 
parts. Honeycomb sandwich assemblies commonly use 
a secondary bonding process to ensure optimal structural 
performance. Laminates co-cured over honeycomb core may 
have distorted plies that have dipped into the core cells. As 
a result, compressive stiffness and strength can be reduced 
as much as 10 and 20 percent, respectively.

Precured laminates undergoing secondary bonding usually 
have a thin nylon or fiberglass peel ply cured onto the 
bonding surfaces. While the peel ply sometimes hampers 
nondestructive inspection of the precured laminate, it has 
been found to be the most effective means of ensuring 
surface cleanliness prior to bonding. When the peel ply is 
stripped away, a pristine surface becomes available. Light 
scuff sanding removes high resin peak impressions produced 
by the peel ply weave which, if they fracture, create cracks 
in the bondline.

Composite materials can be used to structurally repair, restore, 
or enhance aluminum, steel, and titanium components. 
Bonded composite doublers have the ability to slow or stop 
fatigue crack growth, replace lost structural area due to 
corrosion grind-outs, and structurally enhance areas with 
small and negative margins. This technology has often 

been referred to as a combination of metal bonding and 
conventional on-aircraft composite bonded repair. Boron 
prepreg tape with an epoxy resin is most often used for this 
application.

Co-bonding
In the co-bonding process, one of the detail parts is precured 
with the mating part being cured simultaneously with the 
adhesive. Film adhesive is often used to improve peel 
strength.

Layup Process (Typical Laminated Wet Layup)
Layup Techniques
Read the SRM and determine the correct repair material, 
number of plies required for the repair, and the ply 
orientation. Dry the part, remove the damage, and taper 
sand the edges of damaged area. Use a piece of thin plastic, 
and trace the size of each repair ply from the damaged area. 
Indicate the ply orientation of each ply on the trace sheet. 
Copy the repair ply information to a piece of repair material 
that is large enough to cut all plies. Impregnate the repair 
material with resin, place a piece of transparent release film 
over the fabric, cut out the plies, and lay up the plies in the 
damaged area. The plies are usually placed using the smallest 
ply first taper layup sequence, but an alternative method is to 
use the largest ply first layup sequence. In this sequence, the 
first layer of reinforcing fabric completely covers the work 
area, followed by successively smaller layers, and then is 
finished with an extra outer layer or two extending over the 
patch and onto the sound laminate for some distance. Both 
methods are illustrated in Figures 7-46 and 7-47.


7-29
Flat, constant midplane 
stress

Induces curvature

Induces twist

Induces twist and 
curvature

Symmetrical, 
balanced

Nonsymmetrical, 
balanced

Symmetrical, 
nonbalanced

Nonsymmetrical, 
nonbalanced

(+45, –45, 0, 0, –45, +45)

(90, +45, 0, 90, –45, 0)

(–45, 0, 0, –45)

(90, –45, 0, 90, –45, 0)

Type CommentsExample

(+45, –45, 0) S

(±45, 0/90)2S

([±45] 2, 0/90) S

1

2

3

±45°, –45°, 0°, 0°, –45°, +45°

±45°, 0°/90°, ±45°, 0°/90°, 0°/90°, 
±45°, 0°/90°, ±45°

±45°, ±45°, 0°/90°, 0°/90°, ±45°, ±45°

Example Written asLamina

Figure 7-47. Different layup techniques. Figure 7-48. Vacuum bagging of contoured part.

Figure 7-49. Examples of balance laminates.

Bleedout Technique
The traditional bleedout using a vacuum bag technique places 
a perforated release film and a breather/bleeder ply on top of 
the repair. The holes in the release film allow air to breath 
and resin to bleed off over the entire repair area. The amount 
of resin bled off depends on the size and number of holes 
in the perforated release film, the thickness of the bleeder/
breather cloth, the resin viscosity and temperature, and the 
vacuum pressure. 

Controlled bleed allows a limited amount of resin to bleed 
out in a bleeder ply. Place a piece of perforated release film 
on top of the prepreg material, a bleeder ply on top of the 
perforated release film, and a solid release film on top of the 
bleeder. Use a breather and a vacuum bag to compact the 
repair. The breather allows the air to escape. The bleeder can 
only absorb a limited amount of resin, and the amount of resin 
that is bled can be controlled by using multiple bleeder plies. 
Too many bleeder plies can result in a resin-starved repair. 
Always consult the maintenance manual or manufacturer tech 
sheets for correct bagging and bleeding techniques.

No Bleedout
Prepreg systems with 32 to 35 percent resin content are 
typically no-bleed systems. These prepregs contain exactly 
the amount of resin needed in the cured laminate; therefore, 
resin bleedoff is not desired. Bleedout of these prepregs results 
in a resin-starved repair or part. Many high-strength prepregs 
in use today are no-bleed systems. No bleeder is used, and the 
resin is trapped/sealed so that none bleeds away. Consult the 
maintenance manual to determine if bleeder plies are required 
for the repair. A sheet of solid release film (no holes) is placed 
on top of the prepreg and taped off at the edges with flash 
tape. Small openings are created at the edges of the tape so 
that air can escape. A breather and vacuum bag are installed 
to compact the prepreg plies. The air can escape on the edge 
of the repair but no resin can bleed out. [Figure 7-48]

Horizontal (or edge) bleedout is used for small room 
temperature wet layup repairs. A 2-inch strip of breather cloth 
is placed around the repair or part (edge breather). There is no 
need for a release film because there is no bleeder/breather 
cloth on top of the repair. The part is impregnated with resin, 
and the vacuum bag is placed over the repair. A vacuum is 
applied and a squeegee is used to remove air and excess resin 
to the edge breather. 

Ply Orientation Warp Clock
In order to minimize any residual thermal stresses caused 
during cure of the resin, it is always good practice to design 
a symmetrical, or balanced, laminate. Examples of balance 
laminates are presented in Figure 7-49. The first example 
uses unidirectional tape, and examples 2 and 3 are typical 
quasi-isotropic laminates fabricated from woven cloth.

Figure 7-50 presents examples of the effects caused 
by nonsymmetrical laminates. These effects are most 
pronounced in laminates that are cured at high temperature 
in an autoclave or oven due to the thermal stresses developed 
in the laminate as the laminate cools down from the cure 
temperature to room temperature. Laminates cured at room 
temperature using typical wet layup do not exhibit the same 
degree of distortion due to the much smaller thermal stresses.


7-30

Flat, constant midplane 
stress

Induces curvature

Induces twist

Induces twist and 
curvature

Symmetrical, 
balanced

Nonsymmetrical, 
balanced

Symmetrical, 
nonbalanced

Nonsymmetrical, 
nonbalanced

(+45, –45, 0, 0, –45, +45)

(90, +45, 0, 90, –45, 0)

(–45, 0, 0, –45)

(90, –45, 0, 90, –45, 0)

Type CommentsExample

(+45, –45, 0) S

(±45, 0/90)2S

([±45] 2, 0/90) S

1

2

3

±45°, –45°, 0°, 0°, –45°, +45°

±45°, 0°/90°, ±45°, 0°/90°, 0°/90°, 
±45°, 0°/90°, ±45°

±45°, ±45°, 0°/90°, 0°/90°, ±45°, ±45°

Example Written asLamina

Figure 7-50. Examples of the effects caused by nonsymmetrical 
laminates.

The strength and stiffness of a composite buildup depends 
on the ply orientation. The practical range of strength and 
stiffness of carbon epoxy extends from values as low as 
those provided by fiberglass to as high as those provided by 
titanium. This range of values is determined by the orientation 
of the plies to the applied load. Because the strength design 
requirement is a function of the applied load direction, ply 
orientation and ply sequence must be correct. It is critical 
during a repair operation to replace each damaged ply with 
a ply of the same material and orientation or an approved 
substitute.

Warp is the longitudinal fibers of a fabric. The warp is the 
high-strength direction due to the straightness of the fibers. 
A warp clock is used to describe direction of fibers on a 
diagram, spec sheet, or manufacturer’s sheets. If the warp 
clock is not available on the fabric, the orientation is defaulted 
to zero as the fabric comes off the roll. Therefore, 90° to zero 
is across the width of the fabric. 90° to zero is also called 
the fill direction. 

Mixing Resins 
Epoxy resins, like all multipart materials, must be thoroughly 
mixed. Some resin systems have a dye added to aid in seeing 
how well the material is mixed. Since many resin systems do 
not have a dye, the resin must be mixed slowly and fully for 
three minutes. Air enters into the mixture if the resin is mixed 
too fast. If the resin system is not fully mixed, the resin may 
not cure properly. Make sure to scrape the edges and bottom 
of the mixing cup to ensure that all resin is mixed correctly.

Do not mix large quantities of quick curing resin. These types 
of resins produce heat after they are mixed. Smoke can burn 
or poison you when the resin overheats. Mix only the amount 
of material that is required. Mix more than one batch if more 
material is needed than the maximum batch size. 

Saturation Techniques
For wet layup repair, impregnate the fabric with resin. It is 
important to put the right amount of resin on the fabric. Too 
much or too little resin affects the strength of the repair. Air 
that is put into the resin or not removed from the fabric also 
reduces the repair strength. 

Fabric Impregnation With a Brush or Squeegee
The traditional way of impregnating the fabric is by using 
a brush or squeegee. The technician puts a mold release 
compound or a release film on a caul plate so that the plies 
will not adhere to the caul plate. Place a sheet of fabric on 
the caul plate and apply resin in the middle of the sheet. Use 
a brush or squeegee to thoroughly wet the fabric. More plies 
of fabric and resin are added and the process is repeated 
until all plies are impregnated. A vacuum bag will be used 
to consolidate the plies and to bleed off excess resin and 
volatiles. Most wet layup processes have a room temperature 
cure but extra heat, up to 150 °F, are used to speed up the 
curing process. [Figure 7-51]

Fabric Impregnation Using a Vacuum Bag
The vacuum-assisted impregnation method is used to 
impregnate repair fabric with a two-part resin while enclosed 
inside a vacuum bag. This method is preferred for tight-
knit weaves and when near optimum resin-to-fiber ratio is 
required. Compared to squeegee impregnation, this process 
reduces the level of entrapped air within the fabric and offers 
a more controlled and contained configuration for completing 
the impregnation process.

Vacuum-assisted impregnation consists of the following 
steps:

1. Place vacuum bag sealing tape on the table surface 
around the area that is used to impregnate the material. 
The area should be at least 4 inches larger than the 
material to be impregnated.

2. Place an edge breather cloth next to the vacuum bag 
sealing tape. The edge breather should be 1–2 inches 
wide.

3. Place a piece of solid parting film on the table. The 
sheet should be 2-inches larger than the material to 
be impregnated.

4. Weigh the fabric to find the amount of resin mix that 
is necessary to impregnate the material.

5. Lay the fabric on the parting film.

6. Put a piece of breather material between the fabric 
and the edge breather to provide an air path.


7-31

Figure 7-51. Fabric impregnation with a brush or squeegee: A) wet layup materials; B) fabric placement; C) fabric impregnation; D) 
squeegee used to thoroughly wet the fabric.

7. Pour the resin onto the fabric. The resin should be a 
continuous pool in the center area of the fabric.

8. Put vacuum probes on the edge breather.

9. Place a second piece of solid parting film over the 
fabric. This film should be the same size or larger 
than the first piece.

10. Place and seal the vacuum bag, and apply vacuum to 
the bag.

11. Allow 2 minutes for the air to be removed from the 
fabric.

12. Sweep the resin into the fabric with a squeegee. 
Slowly sweep the resin from the center to the edge of 
the fabric. The resin should be uniformly distributed 
over all of the fabric. 

13. Remove the fabric and cut the repair plies.

Vacuum Bagging Techniques
Vacuum bag molding is a process in which the layup is cured 
under pressure generated by drawing a vacuum in the space 

between the layup and a flexible sheet placed over it and 
sealed at the edges. In the vacuum bag molding process, the 
plies are generally placed in the mold by hand layup using 
prepreg or wet layup. High-flow resins are preferred for 
vacuum bag molding.

Single Side Vacuum Bagging
This is the preferred method if the repair part is large enough 
for a vacuum bag on one side of the repair. The vacuum bag 
is taped in place with tacky tape and a vacuum port is placed 
through the bag to create the vacuum.

Envelope Bagging
Envelope bagging is a process in which the part to be repaired 
is completely enclosed in a vacuum bag or the bag is wrapped 
around the end of the component to obtain an adequate seal. It 
is frequently used for removable aircraft parts, such as flight 
controls, access panels, etc., and when a part’s geometry 
and/or the repair location makes it very difficult to properly 
vacuum bag and seal the area in a vacuum. In some cases, a 
part may be too small to allow installation of a single-side 


7-32

Figure 7-52. Envelope bagging of repair.

bag vacuum. Other times, the repair is located on the end of 
a large component that must have a vacuum bag wrapped 
around the ends and sealed all the way around. [Figure 7-52]

Alternate Pressure Application
Shrink Tape
Another method of pressure application for oven cures is 
the use of shrink wrapping or shrink tape. This method is 
commonly used with parts that have been filament wound, 
because some of the same rules for application apply. The 
tape is wrapped around the completed layup, usually with 
only a layer of release material between the tape and the 
layup. Heat is applied to the tape, usually using a heat gun to 
make the tape shrink, a process that can apply a tremendous 
amount of pressure to the layup. After shrinking, the part is 
placed in the oven for cure. High quality parts can be made 
inexpensively using shrink tape.

C-Clamps
Parts can also be pressed together with clamps. This 
technique is used for solid laminate edges of honeycomb 
panels. Clamps (e.g., C-clamps and spring clamps) are used 
for pressing together the edges of components and/or repair 
details. Always use clamps with pressure distribution pads 
because damage to the part may occur if the clamping force 
is too high. Spring clamps can be used in applications where 
resin squeeze-out during cure would require C-clamps to be 
retightened periodically.

Shotbags and Weights
Shotbags and weights can be used also to provide pressure, 
but their use is limited due to the low level of pressure 
imposed.

Curing of Composite Materials
A cure cycle is the time/temperature/pressure cycle used to 
cure a thermosetting resin system or prepreg. The curing 
of a repair is as important as the curing of the original part 
material. Unlike metal repairs in which the materials are 
premanufactured, composite repairs require the technician 
to manufacture the material. This includes all storage, 
processing, and quality control functions. An aircraft repair’s 
cure cycle starts with material storage. Materials that are 
stored incorrectly can begin to cure before they are used 
for a repair. All time and temperature requirements must be 
met and documented. Consult the aircraft structural repair 
manual to determine the correct cure cycle for the part that 
needs to be repaired.

Room Temperature Curing
Room temperature curing is the most advantageous in terms 
of energy savings and portability. Room temperature cure 
wet layup repairs do not restore either the strength or the 
durability of the original 250 °F or 350 °F cure components 
and are often used for wet layup fiberglass repairs for 
noncritical components. Room temperature cure repairs 
can be accelerated by the application of heat. Maximum 
properties are achieved at 150 °F. A vacuum bag can be 
used to consolidate the plies and to provide a path for air 
and volatiles to escape.

Elevated Temperature Curing
All prepreg materials are cured with an elevated temperature 
cure cycle. Some wet layup repairs use an elevated cure 
cycle as well to increase repair strength and to speed up 
the curing process. The curing oven and heat bonder uses a 
vacuum bag to consolidate the plies and to provide a path 
for air and volatiles to escape. The autoclave uses vacuum 
and positive pressure to consolidate the plies and to provide 
a path for air and volatiles to escape. Most heating devices 
use a programmable computer control to run the cure cycles. 
The operator can select from a menu of available cure cycles 
or write his or her own program. Thermocouples are placed 
near the repair, and they provide temperature feedback for 
the heating device. Typical curing temperature for composite 
materials is 250 °F or 350 °F. The temperature of large parts 
that are cured in an oven or autoclave might be different 
from that of an oven or autoclave during the cure cycle, 
because they act like a heat sink. The part temperature is 
most important for a correct cure, so thermocouples are 
placed on the part to monitor and control part temperature. 
The oven or autoclave air temperature probe that measures 
oven or autoclave temperature is not always a reliable device 
to determine part curing temperature. The oven temperature 
and the part temperature can be substantially different if the 
part or tool acts as a heat sink.


7-33

Time

T
e
m

p
e
ra

tu
re

 (
°F

)

350

250

150

70

T
e
m

p
e
ra

tu
re

 (
°C

)

177

121

66

21

Note: For the oven cure, 
 keep a minimum 
 vacuum of 22 inches 
 mercury (22 "Hg)
 during the full cure
 cycle.

NO SCALE

Pressure = 40–50 PSIG (275 KPa to 645 KPa gauge)
for autoclave cure only

Increase the temperature
at a rate of 1–5 °F 
(0.5–3 °C) for each minute.

Decrease the temperature
at a maximum rate of 5 °F 
(3 °C) for each minute.

Below 125 °F (52 °C), release the pressure and remove the 
layup and vacuum bag materials from the part and tool.

Hold for 120–180
minutes at 355 °F ±10 °F
(179 °C ±6 °C)

The cure time starts 
when the last 
thermocouple is in
the specified cure 
temperature range.

Heat-up rate starts at 130 °F (54 °C)

Apply heat to the repair after the autoclave is pressurized.

Open the vacuum bag to the atmosphere after the pressure in the autoclave is above 20 PSIG (138 KPa gauge).

P
re

ss
u

re
 P

S
IG

60

30

0

Figure 7-53. Autoclave cure.

The elevated cure cycle consists of at least three segments: 

• Ramp up: The heating device ramps up at a set 
temperature typically between 3 °F to 5 °F per minute. 

• Hold or soak: The heating device maintains the 
temperature for a predetermined period. 

• Cool down: The heating device cools down at a set 
temperature. Cool down temperatures are typically 
below 5 °F per minute. When the heating device is 
below 125 °F, the part can be removed. When an 
autoclave is used for curing parts, make sure that the 
pressure in the autoclave is relieved before the door 
is opened. [Figure 7-53]

The curing process is accomplished by the application of heat 
and pressure to the laminate. The resin begins to soften and 
flow as the temperature is increased. At lower temperatures, 

very little reaction occurs. Any volatile contaminants, such 
as air and/or water, are drawn out of the laminate with 
vacuum during this time. The laminate is compacted by 
applying pressure, usually vacuum (atmospheric pressure); 
autoclaves apply additional pressure, typically 50–100 psi. 
As the temperature approaches the final cure temperature, 
the rate of reaction greatly increases, and the resin begins to 
gel and harden. The hold at the final cure lets the resin finish 
curing and attain the desired structural properties. 

Composite Honeycomb Sandwich Repairs
A large proportion of current aerospace composite 
components are light sandwich structures that are susceptible 
to damage and are easily damaged. Because sandwich 
structure is a bonded construction and the face sheets are 
thin, damage to sandwich structure is usually repaired by 
bonding. Repairs to sandwich honeycomb structure use 


7-34

External

Internal

Scarf

Patch
Adhesive
Composite skin
Core

Core splice adhesive
Repair core
Repair plug

L
IB

E

R T
Y

2 0

0
8

Tap test with tap hammerInstrumented tap testCoin tap test

Figure 7-54. Typical repairs for honeycomb sandwich structure.

Figure 7-55. Tap testing techniques.

similar techniques for the most common types of face sheet 
materials, such as fiberglass, carbon, and Kevlar®. Kevlar® 

is often repaired with fiberglass. [Figure 7-54]

Damage Classification
A temporary repair meets the strength requirements, but is 
limited by time or flight cycles. At the end of the repair’s life, 
the repair must be removed and replaced. An interim repair 
restores the required strength to the component. However, 
this repair does not restore the required durability to the 
component. Therefore, it has a different inspection interval 
and/or method. A permanent repair is a repair that restores 
the required strength and durability to the component. The 
repair has the same inspection method and interval as the 
original component. 

Sandwich Structures
Minor Core Damage (Filler and Potting Repairs)
A potted repair can be used to repair damage to a sandwich 
honeycomb structure that is smaller than 0.5 inches. The 
honeycomb material could be left in place or could be 
removed and is filled up with a potting compound to restore 
some strength. Potted repairs do not restore the full strength 
of the part.

Potting compounds are most often epoxy resins filled with 
hollow glass, phenolic or plastic microballoons, cotton, flox, 
or other materials. The potting compound can also be used as 
filler for cosmetic repairs to edges and skin panels. Potting 
compounds are also used in sandwich honeycomb panels 
as hard points for bolts and screws. The potting compound 
is heavier than the original core and this could affect flight 
control balance. The weight of the repair must be calculated 
and compared with flight control weight and balance limits 
set out in the SRM.

Damage Requiring Core Replacement and Repair 
to One or Both Faceplates
Note: the following steps are not a substitution for the aircraft 
specific Structural Repair Manual (SRM). Do not assume that 
the repair methods used by one manufacturer are applicable 
to another manufacturer.

Step 1: Inspect the Damage

Thin laminates can be visually inspected and tap tested to 
map out the damage. [Figure 7-55] Thicker laminates need 
more in-depth NDI methods, such as ultrasonic inspection. 
Check in the vicinity of the damage for entry of water, oil, 
fuel, dirt, or other foreign matter. Water can be detected with 
X-ray, back light, or a moisture detector. 

Step 2: Remove Water From Damaged Area

Water needs to be removed from the core before the part is 
repaired. [Figure 7-56] If the water is not removed, it boils 


7-35

8

64

2

0 I0

PRESSURE

Repair area

Breather cloth

Heat blanket

Breather cloth

Thermocouple

0.50 inch minimum

Partial depth core replacement

Full depth core replacement

Figure 7-56. Vacuum bag method for drying parts.

Figure 7-57. Core damage removal. 

during the elevated temperature cure cycle and the face sheets 
blow off the core, resulting in more damage. Water in the 
honeycomb core could also freeze at the low temperatures 
that exist at high altitudes, which could result in disbonding 
of the face sheets. 

Step 3: Remove the Damage

Trim out the damage to the face sheet to a smooth shape with 
rounded corners, or a circular or oval shape. Do not damage 
the undamaged plies, core, or surrounding material. If the 
core is damaged as well, remove the core by trimming to the 
same outline as the skin. [Figure 7-57]

Step 4: Prepare the Damaged Area

Use a flexible disk sander or a rotating pad sander to taper 
sand a uniform taper around the cleaned up damage. Some 
manufacturers give a taper ratio, such as 1:40, and others 
prescribe a taper distance like a 1-inch overlap for each 
existing ply of the face sheet. Remove the exterior finish, 
including conductive coating for an area that is at least 1 inch 
larger than the border of the taper. Remove all sanding dust 
with dry compressed air and a vacuum cleaner. Use a clean 
cloth moistened with approved solvent to clean the damaged 
area. [Figure 7-58]

Step 5: Installation of Honeycomb Core (Wet Layup)

Use a knife to cut the replacement core. The core plug must 
be of the same type, class, and grade of the original core. The 
direction of the core cells should line up with the honey comb 


7-36

Adhesive film*Fabric prepreg

Replacement core plug

Adhesive**

Adhesive film*

Replacement core plug

Adhesive**

Section Through Repair Area
Partial Depth Core Replacement Section A-A

Section Through Repair Area
Full Depth Core Replacement Section B-B

 * BMS 5-154, Grade 5 or two plies of Grade 3
 ** BMS 5-90, Type III, Class 1, Grade 50, or BMS 5-90, Type IV

 * BMS 5-154, Grade 5
 ** BMS 5-90, Type III, Class 1, Grade 50, or BMS 5-90, Type IV

Figure 7-58. Taper sanding of repair area.

Figure 7-59. Core replacement.

of the surrounding material. The plug must be trimmed to the 
right length and be solvent washed with an approved cleaner.

For a wet layup repair, cut two plies of woven fabric that fit 
on the inside surface of the undamaged skin. Impregnate the 
fabric plies with a resin and place in the hole. Use potting 
compound around the core and place it in the hole. For a 
prepreg repair, cut a piece of film adhesive that fits the hole 
and use a foaming adhesive around the plug. The plug should 
touch the sides of the hole. Line up the cells of the plug with 
the original material. Vacuum bag the repair area and use an 
oven, autoclave, or heat blanket to cure the core replacement. 
The wet layup repair can be cured at a room temperature up to 
150 °F. The prepreg repair must be cured at 250 °F or 350 °F. 
Usually, the core replacement is cured with a separate curing 
cycle and not co-cured with the patch. The plug must be sanded 
flush with the surrounding area after the cure. [Figure 7-59]

Step 6: Prepare and Install the Repair Plies

Consult the repair manual for the correct repair material and 
the number of plies required for the repair. Typically, one 
more ply than the original number of plies is installed. Cut 
the plies to the correct size and ply orientation. The repair 
plies must be installed with the same orientation as that of 
the original plies being repaired. Impregnate the plies with 
resin for the wet layup repair, or remove the backing material 
from the prepreg material. The plies are usually placed using 
the smallest ply first taper layup sequence. [Figure 7-60]

Step 7: Vacuum Bag the Repair

Once the ply materials are in place, vacuum bagging is used 
to remove air and to pressurize the repair for curing. Refer 
to Figure 7-61 for bagging instructions.

Step 8: Curing the Repair

The repair is cured at the required cure cycle. Wet layup 
repairs can be cured at room temperature. An elevated 

temperature up to 150 °F can be used to speed up the cure. 
The prepreg repair needs to be cured at an elevated cure cycle. 
[Figure 7-62] Parts that can be removed from the aircraft 
could be cured in a hot room, oven, or autoclave. A heating 
blanket is used for on-aircraft repairs.

Remove the bagging materials after curing and inspect the 
repair. The repair should be free from pits, blisters, resin-
rich and resin-starved areas. Lightly sand the repair patch to 
produce a smooth finish without damaging the fibers. Apply 
top finish and conductive coating (lighting protection).

Step 9: Post Repair Inspection

Use visual, tap, and/or ultrasonic inspection to inspect 
the repair. Remove the repair patch if defects are found. 
[Figure 7-63]

Perform a balance check if a repair to a flight control surface 
was made, and ensure that the repaired flight control is within 
limits of the SRM. Failure to do so could result in flight 
control flutter, and safety of flight could be affected.


7-37

Vacuum gauge

Repair

Solid parting film

Breather material

Vacuum bag material

Bleeder material

Heat blanket

Perforated parting film

Vacuum probe

Vacuum bag sealing compound

Caul plate

8

64

2

0 I0

PRESSURE

A
B

A
B

Nonstructural sanding ply
(adhesive film or fiberglass prepreg)

Determine number of plies, orientation, 
and material from skin identification

Orient repair plies in same 
direction as original layers

Foaming adhesive BMS 5-90, Type III, 
Class 1, Grade 50, or BMS 5-90, Type IV

Extra ply
Prepreg plies

0.50 overlap (typical)

Adhesive film

Aeraded area. Do not damage fibers.

Taper sanded area

Masking tape (remove after sanding)

Core replacement*

*Butt splicing shown.

Figure 7-60. Repair ply installation. 

Figure 7-61. Vacuum processing.

Solid Laminates
Bonded Flush Patch Repairs
New generation aircraft have fuselage and wing structures 
made from solid laminates that are externally stiffened with 
co-cured or co-bonded stringers. These solid laminates have 
many more plies than the face sheets of honeycomb sandwich 
structures. The flush repair techniques for solid laminate 
structures are similar for fiberglass, Kevlar®, and graphite 
with minor differences.

A flush repair can be stepped or, more commonly, scarved 
(tapered). The scarf angles are usually small to ease the load 
into the joint and to prevent the adhesive from escaping. This 
translates into thickness-to-length ratios of 1:10 to 1:70. 

Because inspection of bonded repairs is difficult, bonded 
repairs, as contrasted with bolted repairs, require a higher 
commitment to quality control, better trained personnel, 
and cleanliness.

The scarf joint is more efficient from the viewpoint of load 
transfer as it reduces load eccentricity by closely aligning 
the neutral axis of the parent and the patch. However, this 
configuration has many drawbacks in making the repair. 
First, to maintain a small taper angle, a large quantity of 
sound material must be removed. Second, the replacement 
plies must be very accurately laid up and placed in the 
repair joint. Third, curing of replacement plies can result in 
significantly reduced strength if not cured in the autoclave. 


7-38

Time

T
e
m

p
e
ra

tu
re

 (
°F

)

250

175

100

70

T
e
m

p
e
ra

tu
re

 (
°C

)

121

80

38

21

Note: Keep a minimum vacuum of 22 inches of mercury during the cure cycle.

NO SCALE

Ramp up Ramp down

Soak

Increase the temperature
2 °F to 5 °F (0.5 °C to
3 °C) per minute

Decrease the temperature
5 °F/minute (3 °C/minute) 
maximum

Below 125 °F (52 °C) release the pressure and 
remove the layup and vacuum bag materials

Hold for 90 to 150 
minutes at 260 °F + 6 °F
(126 °C + 6 °C)

Repair
Heat affected area

Heat blanket area

Figure 7-62. Curing the repair.

Figure 7-63. Post-repair inspection. 

Fourth, the adhesive can run to the bottom of the joint, 
creating a nonuniform bond line. This can be alleviated by 
approximating the scarf with a series of small steps. For these 

reasons, unless the part is lightly loaded, this type of repair 
is usually performed at a repair facility where the part can be 
inserted into the autoclave, which can result in part strength 
as strong as the original part.

There are several different repair methods for solid 
laminates. The patch can be precured and then secondarily 
bonded to the parent material. This procedure most closely 
approximates the bolted repair. [Figure 7-64] The patch 
can be made from prepreg and then co-cured at the same 
time as the adhesive. The patch can also be made using a 
wet layup repair. The curing cycle can also vary in length 
of time, cure temperature, and cure pressure, increasing the 
number of possible repair combinations. 

Scarf repairs of composite laminates are performed in the 
sequence of steps described below.

Step 1: Inspection and Mapping of Damage

The size and depth of damage to be repaired must be accurately 
surveyed using appropriate nondestructive evaluation (NDE) 
techniques. A variety of NDE techniques can be used to 


7-39

Repair plies
Adhesive Laminate

Initially, machine scarf to a knife’s edge steeper than required.

Continue working scarf back to scarf outline dimension.

Finished scarf slope

Finished scarf slope

Sanding disk

Scarf outline periphery

Scarf outline periphery

Sanding disk holder

Figure 7-64. A precured patch can be secondarily bound to the 
parent material. 

Figure 7-65. Scarf patch of solid laminate.

inspect for damage in composite structures. The simplest 
technique is visual inspection, in which whitening due to 
delamination and/or resin cracking can be used to indicate 
the damage area in semitransparent composites, such as 
glass-polyester and glass-vinyl ester laminates. 

Visual inspection is not an accurate technique because not 
all damage is detectable to the eye, particularly damage 
hidden by paint, damage located deep below the surface, and 
damage in nontransparent composites, such as carbon and 
aramid laminates. A popular technique is tap testing, in which 
a lightweight object, such as a coin or hammer, is used to 
locate damage. The main benefits of tap testing are that it is 
simple and it can be used to rapidly inspect large areas. Tap 
testing can usually be used to detect delamination damage 
close to the surface, but becomes increasingly less reliable 
the deeper the delamination is located below the surface. Tap 
testing is not useful for detecting other types of damage, such 
as resin cracks and broken fibers. 

More advanced NDE techniques for inspecting composites 
are impedance testing, x-ray radiography, thermography, 
and ultrasonics. Of these techniques, ultrasonics is arguably 
the most accurate and practical and is often used for 
surveying damage. Ultrasonics can be used to detect small 
delaminations located deep below the surface, unlike visual 
inspection and tap testing.

Step 2: Removal of Damaged Material

Once the scope of the damaged area to be repaired has 
been determined, the damaged laminate must be removed. 
The edges of the sound laminate are then tapered back to 
a shallow angle. The taper slope ratio, also known as the 
scarf angle, should be less than 12 to 1 (< 5°) to minimize 
the shear strains along the bond line after the repair patch is 
applied. The shallow angle also compensates for some errors 
in workmanship and other shop variables that might diminish 
patch adhesion. [Figure 7-65]

Step 3: Surface Preparation 

The laminate close to the scarf zone should be lightly 
abraded with sandpaper, followed by the removal of dust 
and contaminates. It is recommended that, if the scarf zone 
has been exposed to the environment for any considerable 
period of time, it should be cleaned with a solvent to remove 
contamination.

Step 4: Molding

A rigid backing plate having the original profile of the 
composite structure is needed to ensure the repair has the 
same geometry as the surrounding structure.

Step 5: Laminating

Laminated repairs are usually done using the smallest 
ply-first taper sequence. While this repair is acceptable, it 
produces relatively weak, resin-rich areas at each ply edge at 
the repair interface. The largest ply first laminate sequence, 
where the first layer of reinforcing fabric completely covers 
the work area, produces a stronger interface joint. Follow the 
manufacturer’s SRM instructions.

Selection of the reinforcing material is critical to ensuring 
the repair has acceptable mechanical performance. The 
reinforcing fabric or tape should be identical to the 
reinforcement material used in the original composite. Also, 
the fiber orientation of the reinforcing layers within the repair 
laminate should match those of the original part laminate, 
so that the mechanical properties of the repair are as close 
to original as possible.


7-40

Nonstructural sanding ply
(adhesive film or

fiberglass prepreg)

Extra repair ply

Third repair ply

Second repair ply

First repair ply

Adhesive film

Masking tape (3.0 to 4.0 wide)

Taper sand

20 psi air

Drill holes

Inject resin

Delamination

Skin

Injection gun

Figure 7-66. Trailing edge repair.

Figure 7-67. Resin injection repair.

Step 6: Finishing

After the patch has cured, a conducting mesh and finish coat 
should be applied if needed.

Trailing Edge and Transition Area Patch Repairs
Trailing edges of control panels are highly vulnerable to 
damage. The aft 4 inches are especially subject to ground 
collision and handling, as well as to lightning strike. Repairs 
in this region can be difficult because both the skins and the 
trailing edge reinforcement may be involved. The repairs to 
a honeycomb core on a damaged edge or panel are similar to 
the repair of a sandwich honeycomb structure discussed in 
the Damage Requiring Core Replacement and Repair to One 
or Both Faceplate Repair sections. Investigate the damage, 
remove damaged plies and core, dry the part, install new core, 
layup the repair plies, curing and post inspection. A typical 
trail edge repair is shown in Figure 7-66.

Resin Injection Repairs
Resin injection repairs are used on lightly loaded structures 
for small damages to a solid laminate due to delamination. 
Two holes are drilled on the outside of the delamination area 
and a low-viscosity resin is injected in one hole until it flows 
out the other hole. Resin injection repairs are sometimes 
used on sandwich honeycomb structure to repair a facesheet 
disbond. Disadvantages of the resin injection method are that 
the fibers are cut as a result of drilling holes, it is difficult to 
remove moisture from the damaged area, and it is difficult to 
achieve complete infusion of resin. [Figure 7-67]

Composite Patch Bonded to Aluminum Structure
Composite materials can be used to structurally repair, restore, 
or enhance aluminum, steel, and titanium components. 
Bonded composite doublers have the ability to slow or 
stop fatigue crack growth, replace lost structural area due 
to corrosion grindouts, and structurally enhance areas with 
small and negative margins.

Boron epoxy, GLARE®, and graphite epoxy materials have 
been used as composite patches to restore damaged metallic 
wing skins, fuselage sections, floor beams, and bulkheads. 
As a crack growth inhibitor, the stiff bonded composite 
materials constrain the cracked area, reduce the gross stress 
in the metal, and provide an alternate load path around the 
crack. As a structural enhancement or blendout filler, the 
high modulus fiber composites offer negligible aerodynamic 
resistance and tailorable properties.

Surface preparation is very important to achieve the adhesive 
strength. Grit blast silane and phosphoric acid anodizing are 
used to prepare aluminum skin. Film adhesives using a 250 °F 
(121 °C) cure are used routinely to bond the doublers to the 
metallic structure. Critical areas of the installation process 
include a good thermal cure control, having and maintaining 
water-free bond surfaces, and chemically and physically 
prepared bond surfaces. 

Secondarily bonded precured doublers and in-situ cured 
doublers have been used on a variety of structural geometries 
ranging from fuselage frames to door cutouts to blade 
stiffeners. Vacuum bags are used to apply the bonding and 
curing pressure between the doubler and metallic surface. 

Fiberglass Molded Mat Repairs
Fiberglass molded mats consists of short fibers, and the 
strength is much less than other composite products that 
use continuous fibers. Fiberglass molded mats are not used 
for structural repair applications, but could be used for non-


7-41

Figure 7-68. Radome repair tool.
Figure 7-69. Lightning protection strips on a radome.

structural applications. The fiberglass molded mat is typically 
used in combination with fiberglass fabric. The molded mats 
are impregnated with resin just like a wet layup for fiberglass 
fabric. The advantage of the molded mat is the lower cost 
and the ease of use.

Radome Repairs
Aircraft radomes, being an electronic window for the radar, 
are often made of nonconducting honeycomb sandwich 
structure with only three or four plies of fiberglass. The 
skins are so thin so that they do not block the radar signals. 
The thin structure, combined with the location in front of the 
aircraft, makes the radome vulnerable to hail damage, bird 
strikes, and lightning strikes. Low-impact damage could 
lead to disbonds and delamination. Often, water is found in 
the radome structure due to impact damage or erosion. The 
moisture collects in the core material and begins a freeze-
thaw cycle each time the airplane is flown. This eventually 
breaks down the honeycomb material causing a soft spot on 
the radome itself. Damage to a radome needs to be repaired 
quickly to avoid further damage and radar signal obstructions. 
Trapped water or moisture can produce a shadow on the radar 
image and severely degrade the performance of the radar. 
To detect water ingression in radomes, the available NDE 
techniques include x-ray radiography, infrared thermography, 
and a radome moisture meter that measures the RF power 
loss caused by the presence of water. The repairs to radomes 
are similar to repairs to other honeycomb structures, but the 
technician needs to realize that repairs could affect the radar 
performance. A special tool is necessary to repair severely 
damaged radomes. [Figure 7-68]

Transmissivity testing after radome repair ensures that the 
radar signal is transmitted properly through the radome. 
Radomes have lightning protections strips bonded to the 
outside of the radome to dissipate the energy of a lighting 

strike. It is important that these lightning protection strips are 
in good condition to avoid damage to the radome structure. 
Typical failures of lightning protection strips that are found 
during inspection are high resistance caused by shorts in the 
strips or attaching hardware and disbonding of the strips from 
the radome surface. [Figures 7-69] 

External Bonded Patch Repairs
Repairs to damaged composite structures can be made with an 
external patch. The external patch repair could be made with 
prepreg, a wet layup, or a precured patch. External patches 
are usually stepped to reduce the stress concentration at the 
edge of the patch. The disadvantages of the external patch are 
the eccentricity of the loading that causes peel stresses and 
the protrusion of the patch in the air stream. The advantage 
of the external patch is that it is easier to accomplish than a 
flush scarf-type repair.

External Bonded Repair With Prepreg Plies

The repair methods for carbon, fiberglass, and Kevlar® are 
similar. Fiberglass is sometimes used to repair Kevlar® 
material. The main steps in repairing damage with an external 
patch are investigating and mapping the damage, removal 
of the damage, layup of the repair plies, vacuum bagging, 
curing, and finish coating.

Step 1: Investigating and Mapping the Damage

Use the tap test or ultrasonic test to map out the damage.

Step 2: Damage Removal

Trim out the damage to a smooth round or oval shape. Use 
scotch or sand paper to rough up the parent surface at least 
1 inch larger than the patch size. Clean the surface with an 
approved solvent and cheese cloth.

Step 3: Layup of the Repair Plies

Use the SRM to determine the number, size, and orientation 
of the repair plies. The repair ply material and orientation 
must be the same as the orientation of the parent structure. 
The repair can be stepped to reduce peel stresses at the edges.


7-42

Inner vacuum bag extends past rigid box
Inner vacuum bag

Rigid box with two layers of breather and vacuum bagRigid outer box: manufacture sides from 2" x 4", top 
from 1" plywood, drill 1/4" air holes on each side.

Box top

Nails

Side boards (wooden 2" x 4")

Air holes
  (approxmately
   0.25" diameter) 

1" thick
plywood

Figure 7-70. DVD tool made from wood two by fours and plywood.

Step 4: Vacuum Bagging

A film adhesive is placed over the damaged area and the 
repair layup is placed on top of the repair. The vacuum 
bagging materials are placed on top of the repair (see Prepreg 
Layup and Controlled Bleed Out) and a vacuum is applied.

Step 5: Curing the Repair

The prepreg patch can be cured with a heater blanket that is 
placed inside the vacuum bag, oven, or autoclave when the 
part can be removed from the aircraft. Most prepregs and 
film adhesives cure at either 250 °F or 350 °F. Consult the 
SRM for the correct cure cycle.

Step 6: Applying Top Coat

Remove the vacuum bag from the repair after the cure 
and inspect the repair, remove the patch if the repair 
is not satisfactory. Lightly sand the repair and apply a  
protective topcoating.

External Repair Using Wet Layup and Double Vacuum 
Debulk Method (DVD)

Generally, the properties of a wet layup repair are not as good 
as a repair with prepreg material; but by using a DVD method, 
the properties of the wet layup process can be improved. The 
DVD process is a technique to remove entrapped air that 
causes porosity in wet layup laminates. The DVD process 
is often used to make patches for solid laminate structures 
for complex contoured surfaces. The wet layup patch is 
prepared in a DVD tool and then secondary bonded to the 
aircraft structure. [Figure 7-70] The laminating process is 
similar to a standard wet layup process. The difference is 
how the patch is cured.

Double Vacuum Debulk Principle

The double vacuum bag process is used to fabricate wet layup 
or prepreg repair laminates. Place the impregnated fabric 
within the debulking assembly, shown in Figure 7-70. To 

begin the debulking process, evacuate the air within the inner 
flexible vacuum bag. Then, seal the rigid outer box onto the 
inner vacuum bag, and evacuate the volume of air between 
the rigid outer box and inner vacuum bag. Since the outer 
box is rigid, the second evacuation prevents atmospheric 
pressure from pressing down on the inner vacuum bag over 
the patch. This subsequently prevents air bubbles from being 
pinched off within the laminate and facilitates air removal by 
the inner vacuum. Next, heat the laminate to a predetermined 
debulking temperature in order to reduce the resin viscosity 
and further improve the removal of air and volatiles from 
the laminate. Apply the heat through a heat blanket that is 
controlled with thermocouples placed directly on the heat 
blanket. Once the debulking cycle is complete, compact the 
laminate to consolidate the plies by venting the vacuum source 
attached to the outer rigid box, allowing atmospheric pressure 
to reenter the box and provide positive pressure against the 
inner vacuum bag. Upon completion of the compaction cycle, 
remove the laminate from the assembly and prepare for cure.

DVD tools can be purchased commercially but can also be 
fabricated locally from wood two-by-fours and sheets of 
plywood, as illustrated in Figure 7-70.

Patch Installation on the Aircraft

After the patch comes out of the DVD tool, it is still possible 
to form it to the contour of the aircraft, but the time is 
typically limited to 10 minutes. Place a film adhesive, or 
paste adhesive, on the aircraft skin and place the patch on 
the aircraft. Use a vacuum bag and heater blanket to cure the 
adhesive. [Figures 7-71 and 7-72]

External Repair Using Precured Laminate Patches

Precured patches are not very flexible and cannot be used 
on highly curved or compound curved surfaces. The repair 
steps are similar as in External Bonded Repair With Prepreg 
Plies, except step 3 and 4 that follow. 


7-43

1. Insulation
2. Heat blanket
3. Caul plate
4. Nonporous film
5. Porous film
6. Patch laminate
7. Bagging materials
8. Bagging film
V1: Inner vacuum
V2: Outer vacuum

Bottom plate
1
2

3

4
5

6
5
7

8V2

V1

Vacuum port Rigid outer box

Vacuum port

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180

Ramp rate 1 °F to 5 °F per minute Vent outer box after 60 minutes

Ramp rate 1 °F to 5 °F per minute Vent outer box after 60 minutes

Inner bag Full vacuum
Outer box No vacuum

Inner bag Full vacuum
Outer box Full vacuum

Inner bag Full vacuum
Outer box No vacuum

Inner bag Full vacuum
Outer box Full vacuum

Hold at 125 °F for 90 minutes ± 5 minutes

Hold at 125 °F for 150 minutes ± 5 minutes

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

SMP-0029M1-9 Double Vacuum Debulk Cycle—Laminate Thickness <16 plies

SMP-0029M1-10 Double Vacuum Debulk Cycle—Laminate Thickness <16 plies

Figure 7-71. Double vacuum debulk schematic.

Figure 7-72. DVD cure cycle.

Figure 7-73. Precured patches.

Step 3: A Precured Patch

Consult the SRM for correct size, ply thickness, and 
orientation. You can laminate and cure the precured patch in 
the repair shop and secondary bond to the parent structure, 
or obtain standard precured patches. [Figure 7-73]


7-44

Table 2

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Lightly loaded structures – 
laminate thickness less than 0.1"

Highly loaded structures – 
laminate thickness between 0.125" – 0.5"

Highly loaded structures – 
laminate thickness larger than 0.5"

High peeling stresses

Honeycomb structure

Dry surfaces

Wet and/or contaminated surfaces

Disassembly required

Restore unnotched strength

Bonded versus bolted repair BondedBolted

Figure 7-74. Bolted versus bonded repair. 

Step 4: For a Precured Patch

Apply film adhesive or paste adhesive to the damaged area 
and place the precured patch on top. Vacuum bag the repair 
and cure at the correct temperature for the film adhesive or 
paste adhesive. Most film adhesive cure at either 250 °F 
or 350 °F. Some paste adhesives cure at room temperature 
although an elevated temperature could be used to speed the 
curing process.

Bonded versus Bolted Repairs

Bonded repair concepts have found applicability in both 
types of manufacturing assembly methods. They have the 
advantage of not introducing stress concentrations by drilling 
fastener holes for patch installation and can be stronger than 
original part material. The disadvantage of bonded repairs is 
that most repair materials require special storage, handling, 
and curing procedures. 

Bolted repairs are quicker and easier to fabricate than 
bonded repairs. They are normally used on composite skins 
thicker than 0.125-inch to ensure sufficient fastener bearing 
area is available for load transfer. They are prohibited in 
honeycomb sandwich assemblies due to the potential for 
moisture intrusion from the fastener holes and the resulting 
core degradation. Bolted repairs are heavier than comparable 
bonded repairs, limiting their use on weight-sensitive flight 
control surfaces.

Honeycomb sandwich parts often have thin face sheets 
and are most effectively repaired by using a bonded scarf 
type repair. A bonded external step patch can be used as an 
alternative. Bolted repairs are not effective for thin laminates 
because of the low bearing stress of the composite laminate. 
Thicker solid laminates used on larger aircraft can be up 
to an inch thick in highly loaded areas and these types of 
laminates cannot be effectively repaired using a bonded scarf 
type repair. [Figure 7-74]

Bolted Repairs
Aircraft designed in the 1970s used composite sandwich 
honeycomb structure for lightly loaded secondary structure, 
but new large aircraft use thick solid laminates for primary 
structure instead of sandwich honeycomb. These thick solid 
laminate structures are quite different from the traditional 
sandwich honeycomb structures used for flight controls, 
landing gear doors, flaps, and spoilers of today’s aircraft. 
They present a challenge to repair and are difficult to repair 
with a bonded repair method. Bolted repair methods have 
been developed to repair thicker solid laminates.

Bolted repairs are not desirable for honeycomb sandwich 
structure due to the limited bearing strength of the thin face 
sheets and weakened honeycomb structure from drilling 

holes. The advantage of a bolted repair is that you need 
to select only patch material and fasteners, and the repair 
method is similar to a sheet metal repair. There is no need 
for curing the repair and storing the prepreg repair material 
and film adhesives in a freezer. Patches may be made from 
aluminum, titanium, steel, or precured composite material. 
Composite patches are often made from carbon fiber with an 
epoxy resin or fiberglass with an epoxy resin.

You can repair a carbon fiber structure with an aluminum 
patch, but you must place a layer of fiberglass cloth between 
the carbon part and the aluminum patch to prevent galvanic 
corrosion. Titanium and precured composite patches are 
preferred for repair of highly loaded components. Precured 
carbon/epoxy patches have the same strength and stiffness 
as the parent material as they are usually cured similarly. 

Titanium or stainless steel fasteners are used for bolted repairs 
of a carbon fiber structure. Aluminum fasteners corrode if 
used with carbon fiber. Rivets cannot be used because the 
installation of rivets using a rivet gun introduce damage to 
the hole and surrounding structure and rivets expand during 
installation, which is undesirable for composite structures 
because it could cause delimination of the composite material.

Repair Procedures

Step 1: Inspection of the Damage

The tap test is not effective to detect delamination in thick 
laminates unless the damage is close to the surface. An 


7-45

Three rows of fasteners are required

Edge distamce is three times the diameter of the fastener

Spacing four to six times the diameter of the fastener

Hi-lok or lock bolt

Damage is cut out to a smooth rectangular shape

Radius of repair plate corner is 0.5"

Figure 7-75. Repair layout for bolted repair of composite structure.

ultrasonic inspection is necessary to determine the damage 
area. Consult the SRM to find an applicable NDI procedure. 

Step 2: Removal of the Damage

The damaged area needs to be trimmed to a round or 
rectangular hole with large smooth radii to prevent stress 
concentrations. Remove the damage with a sander, router, 
or similar tool.

Step 3: Patch Preparation

Determine the size of the patch based on repair information 
found in the SRM. Cut, form, and shape the patch before 
attaching the patch to the damaged structure. It is easier to 
make the patch a little bigger than calculated and trim to 
size after drilling all fastener holes. In some cases, the repair 
patches are stocked preshaped and predrilled. If cutting is to 
be performed, standard shop procedures should be used that 
are suitable for the patch material. Titanium is hard to work 
and requires a large powerful slip roller to curve the material. 
Metal patches require filing to prevent crack initiation around 
the cut edges. When drilling pilot holes in the composite, 
the holes for repair fasteners must be a minimum of four 
diameters from existing fasteners and have a minimum edge 
distance of three fastener diameters. This is different from the 
standard practice for aluminum of allowing a two diameter 
distance. Specific pilot hole sizes and drill types to be used 
should follow specific SRM instructions. [Figure 7-75]

Step 4: Hole Pattern Lay Out

To locate the patch on the damaged area, draw two 
perpendicular centerlines on the parent structure and on the 
patch material that define the principal load or geometric 
directions. Then, lay out hole pattern on the patch and drill 
pilot holes in the patch material. Align the two perpendicular 

centerlines of the patch with the lines on the parent structure 
and transfer the pilot holes to the parent material. Use clecos 
to keep the patch in place. Mark the edges of the patch so that 
it can be returned to the same location easily. 

Step 5: Drilling and Reaming Holes in Patch and Parent 
Structure

Composite skins should be backed up to prevent splitting. 
Enlarge the pilot holes in the patch and parent materials with 
a drill 1⁄64 undersize and then ream all holes to the correct size. 
A tolerance of +0.0025/–0.000-inch is usually recommended 
for aircraft parts. For composites, this means interference 
fasteners are not used. 

Step 6: Fastener Installation

Once fastener holes are drilled full size and reamed, 
permanent fasteners are installed. Before installation, 
measure the fastener grip length for each fastener using a 
grip length gauge. As different fasteners are required for 
different repairs, consult the SRM for permissible fastener 
type and installation procedure. However, install all fasteners 
wet with sealant and with proper torque for screws and bolts.

Step 7: Sealing of Fasteners and Patch

Sealants are applied to bolted repairs for prevention of water/
moisture intrusion, chemical damage, galvanic corrosion, 
and fuel leaks. They also provide contour smoothness. The 
sealant must be applied to a clean surface. Masking tape is 
usually placed around the periphery of the patch, parallel 
with the patch edges and leaving a small gap between the 
edge of the patch and the masking tape. Sealing compound 
is applied into this gap.


7-46

Figure 7-76. ASP fastener system. 

Step 8: Application of Finish Coat and Lightning Protection 
Mesh

The repair needs to be sanded, primed, and painted with an 
approved paint system. A lightning protection mesh needs 
to be applied if composite patches are used in an area that is 
prone to lightning strikes.

Fasteners Used with Composite Laminates
Many companies make specialty fasteners for composite 
structures and several types of fasteners are commonly used: 
threaded fasteners, lock bolts, blind bolts, blind rivets, and 
specialty fasteners for soft structures, such as honeycomb 
panels. The main differences between fasteners for metal 
and composite structures are the materials and the footprint 
diameter of nuts and collars. 

Corrosion Precautions
Neither fiberglass nor Kevlar® fiber-reinforced composites 
cause corrosion problems when used with most fastener 
materials. Composites reinforced with carbon fibers, 
however, are quite cathodic when used with materials, such 
as aluminum or cadmium, the latter of which is a common 
plating used on fasteners for corrosion protection.

Fastener Materials 
Titanium alloy Ti-6Al-4V is the most common alloy for 
fasteners used with carbon fiber reinforced composite 
structures. Austenitic stainless steels, superalloys (e.g., 
A286), multiphase alloys (e.g., MP35N or MP159), and 
nickel alloys (e.g., alloy 718) also appear to be very 
compatible with carbon fiber composites.
  
Fastener System for Sandwich Honeycomb 
Structures (SPS Technologies Comp Tite)
The adjustable sustain preload (ASP) fastening system 
provides a simplified method of fastening composite, 
soft core, metallic or other materials, which are sensitive 
to fastener clamp-up or installation force conditions. 
Clamping force can be infinitely adjustable within maximum 
recommended torque limits and no further load is applied 
during installation of the lock collar. The fastener is available 
in two types. The ASP® has full shank and the 2ASP® has a 
pilot type shank. [Figures 7-76 and 7-77]

Hi-Lok® and Huck-Spin® Lockbolt Fasteners
Most composite primary structures for the aircraft industry 
are fastened with Hi-Loks® (Hi-Shear Corp.) or Huck-
Spin® lockbolts for permanent installations. The Hi-Lok® 
is a threaded fastener that incorporates a hex key in the 
threaded end to react to the torque applied to the collar 
during installation. The collar includes a frangible portion 
that separates at a predetermined torque value. [Figure 7-78]

The lockbolt incorporates a collar that is swaged into annular 
grooves. It comes in two types: pull and stump. The pull-
type is the most common, where a frangible pintail is used to 
react the axial load during the swaging of the collar. When 
the swaging load reaches a predetermined limit, the pintail 
breaks away at the breakneck groove. The installation of 
the Hi-Lok® and the pull-type Huck-Spin® lockbolt can be 
performed by one technician from one side of the structure. 
The stump-type lockbolt, on the other hand, requires support 
on the head side of the fastener to react the swage operation. 
This method is usually reserved for automated assembly of 
detail structure in which access is not a problem.

The specific differences in these fasteners for composite 
structure in contrast to metal structure are small. For the 
Hi-Lok®, material compatibility is the only issue; aluminum 
collars are not recommended. Standard collars of A286, 
303 stainless steel, and titanium alloy are normally used. 
The Huck-Spin® lockbolt requires a hat-shaped collar that 
incorporates a flange to spread the high bearing loads during 
installation. The lockbolt pin designed for use in composite 
structure has six annular grooves as opposed to five for metal 
structure. [Figures 7-79 and 7-80]

Eddie-Bolt® Fasteners
Eddie-Bolt® fasteners (Alcoa) are similar in design to Hi-
Loks® and are a natural choice for carbon fiber composite 
structures. The Eddie-Bolt® pin is designed with flutes in 
the threaded portion, which allow a positive lock to be made 
during installation using a specially designed mating nut or 
collar. The mating nut has three lobes that serve as driving 
ribs. During installation, at a predetermined preload, the lobes 


7-47

Pin component installed clearance fit

Sleeve component threaded on pin

Lock collar placed on pin

Lock collar swaged on pin splines

Pintail breaks offTorque controlled tool tightens sleeve

1

2

3

4

5

6

HLH 103, HLH 104, 
HLH 110, HLH 111 or 
HLH 500 installation tool

CP titanium flanged collar Pull grooves

Lock grooves

Large 130 flush shear head

Figure 7-77. ASP fastener system installation sequence. 

Figure 7-79. Huck-Spin® lockbolt.

Figure 7-78. Hi-Lok® installation.

compress the nut material into the flutes of the pin and form 
the locking feature. The advantage for composite structure 
is that titanium alloy nuts can be used for compatibility and 
weight saving without the fear of galling. The nuts spin on 
freely, and the locking feature is established at the end of the 
installation cycle. [Figure 7-81]

Cherry’s E-Z Buck® (CSR90433) Hollow Rivet
The Cherry Hollow End E-Z Buck® rivet is made from 
titanium/columbium alloy and has a shear strength of 40 KSI. 
The E-Z Buck® rivet is designed to be used in a double flush 
application for fuel tanks. The main advantage of this type 
of rivet is that it takes less than half the force of a solid rivet 
of the same material. The rivets are installed with automated 
riveting equipment or a rivet squeezer. Special optional 
dies ensure that the squeezer is always centered during 
installation, avoiding damage to the structure. [Figure 7-82]

Blind Fasteners
Composite structures do not require as many fasteners as 
metal aircraft because stiffeners and doublers are co-cured 
with the skins, eliminating many fasteners. The size of panels 
on aircraft has increased in composite structures, which 
causes backside inaccessibility. Therefore, blind fasteners 
or screws and nutplates must be used in these areas. Many 
manufacturers make blind fasteners for composite structures; 
a few are discussed below.


7-48

Tool engages lockbolt pintail

Gap closes, collar swage begins

Pintail fractures at the break notch

Tool anvil reverses off swaged collar

Installation completeSwage process complete

1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure 7-80. Huck-Spin® installation sequence.

Figure 7-81. Eddie-Bolts®.

Blind Bolts 
The Cherry Maxibolt® is available in titanium for 
compatibility with composite structures. The shear strength 
of the Maxibolt® is 95 KSI. It can be installed from one side 
with a G-83 or equivalent pneumatic-hydraulic installation 
tool, and is available in 100° flush head, 130° flush head and 
protruding head styles. [Figure 7-83]

The Alcoa UAB™ blind bolt system is designed for composite 
structures and is available in titanium and stainless steel. The 
UAB™ blind bolt system is available in 100° flush head, 130° 
flush head, and protruding head styles.

The Accu-Lok™ Blind Fastening System is designed 
specifically for use in composite structures in which access 
is limited to one side of the structure. It combines high joint 
preload with a large diameter footprint on the blind side. 
The large footprint enables distribution of the joint preload 
over a larger area, virtually eliminating the possibility of 
delaminating the composite structure. The shear strength of 
the Accu-Lok™ is 95 KSI, and it is available in 100° flush 
head, 130° flush head, and protruding head styles. A similar 
fastener designed by Monogram is called the Radial-Lok®. 
[Figure 7-84]

Fiberlite
The fiberlite fastening system uses composite materials for a 
wide range of aerospace hardware. The strength of fiberlite 
fasteners is equivalent to aluminum at two-thirds the weight. 
The composite fastener provides good material compatibility 
with carbon fiber and fiberglass.

Screws and Nutplates in Composite Structures
The use of screws and nutplates in place of Hi-Loks® or 
blind fasteners is recommended if a panel must be removed 
periodically for maintenance. Nutplates used in composite 
structures usually require three holes: two for attachment 
of the nutplate and one for the removable screw, although 
rivetless nut plates and adhesive bonded nutplates are 
available that do not require drilling and countersinking two 
extra holes.


7-49

C2C2

C1

D

G
ri
p

 r
a

n
g

e

100° ± 1°

100° ± 2°

0.028

0.037

0.046

0.046

B
REF

0.028

0.037

0.046

0.046

1/8 (–4)

5/32 (–5)

3/16 (–6)

7/32 (–7)

C1
DIA

0.195
0.189

0.247
0.242

0.302
0.297

0.328
0.323

C2
DIA

0.195
0.189

0.247
0.242

0.302
0.297

0.328
0.323

D
DIA

0.132
0.129

0.162
0.159

0.195
0.191

0.227
0.224

Rivet
Diameter

A
REF

CSR 90433

A (ref) for
manufactured

head

B (ref) for
shop-formed

head

2,500

2,700

3,000

3,750

1/8" (–4)

5/32" (–5)

3/16" (–6)

7/32" (–7)

Hollow End E-Z Buck®
Nominal Diameter

Upset Load (Lb)
+ 200 Lb

839B10-4

839B10-5

839B10-6

839B10-7

1/8"

5/32"

3/16"

7/32"

839B1-4

839B1-5

839B1-6

839B1-7

Rivet
Diameter

1/4" Diameter
Mount

3/16" Diameter
Mount

Cherry Flaring Snap Die Part Numbers

Flushness
+0.005
−0.000

Flushness
+0.015
−0.000

Head dimple

Squeezer yoke or
riveting machine

Cherry flaring snap die

Hollow End E-Z Buck®

Composite material

Cherry snap die (optional)
(839B3 = 3/16" shank size)
(839B13 = 1/4" shank size)

Note: 1 die fits all fastener diameters.

Manufactured head

Shop formed head

Figure 7-82. Cherry’s E-Z Buck hollow rivet.

Machining Processes and Equipment
Drilling
Hole drilling in composite materials is different from drilling 
holes in metal aircraft structures. Different types of drill bits, 
higher speeds, and lower feeds are required to drill precision 
holes. Structures made from carbon fiber and epoxy resin 
are very hard and abrasive, requiring special flat flute drills 
or similar four-flute drills. Aramid fiber (Kevlar®)/epoxy 
composites are not as hard as carbon but are difficult to 
drill unless special cutters are used because the fibers tend 
to fray or shred unless they are cut clean while embedded 
in the epoxy. Special drill bits with clothes pin points and 
fish-tail points have been developed that slice the fibers prior 
to pulling them out of the drilled hole. If the Kevlar®/epoxy 
part is sandwiched between two metal parts, standard twist 
drills can be used.

Equipment

Air-driven tools are used for drilling holes in composite 
materials. Drill motors with free speed of up to 20,000 rpm 
are used. A general rule for drilling composites is to use high 
speed and a low feed rate (pressure). Drilling equipment 
with a power feed control produces better hole quality than 
drill motors without power feed control. Drill guides are 
recommended, especially for thicker laminates. 

Do not use standard twist drill bits for drilling composite 
structures. Standard high-speed steel is unacceptable, because 
it dulls immediately, generates excessive heat, and causes ply 
delamination, fiber tear-out, and unacceptable hole quality.

Drill bits used for carbon fiber and fiberglass are made from 
diamond-coated material or solid carbide because the fibers 


7-50

K
L

Z

B

C

P

D
DIA

0.005 Crown (ref)

A'
DIA

R
RAD

GRIP

Not to exceed “D” 
diameter

Depressed dot indicates 
titanium stem

Stem
Sleeve

A
DIA

Shift washer

Lock collar
130° ± 1°

1

6
3 Grip identification

Manufacturer’s identification

Basic part number

7 7 7 4

08 T

Head Marking Note:
DIA = Diameter

A
Max

0.333
0.386
0.507

R
Max

0.025
0.025
0.030

B
Max

0.039
0.043
0.057

A'
Min

0.296
0.342
0.463

P
Max

0.215
0.250
0.305

Z
Min

0.844
0.875
1.000

Single Shear
 Minimum

Tensile
Minimum

Installed Strength (Lb)

0.164/0.167
0.199/0.202
0.260/0.263

Hole Limits

1980
2925
5005

900
1400
2100

–05
–06
–06

Dia.
Dash
No.

0.163
0.198
0.259

D
+ 0.001 6 5

4

Min Max

0.094
0.154
0.219
0.281
0.344
0.406
0.469
0.531
0.594
0.656
0.719

0.157
0.220
0.282
0.345
0.407
0.470
0.532
0.595
0.657
0.720
0.782

–05
Diameter

0.157
0.220
0.282
0.345
0.407
0.470
0.532
0.595
0.657
0.720
0.782

Overlap
Max

0.173
0.236
0.298
0.361
0.423
0.486
0.548
0.611
0.673
0.736
0.798

0.173
0.236
0.298
0.361
0.423
0.486
0.548
0.611
0.673
0.736
0.798

L Ref K Max

0.476
0.536
0.602
0.664
0.727
0.789
0.852
0.914
0.977
1.039
1.102

0.336
0.398
0.460
0.523
0.585
0.648
0.710
0.773
0.835
0.898
0.960

0.521
0.584
0.647
0.709
0.772
0.834
0.897
0.959
1.022
1.084
1.147

0.355
0.417
0.480
0.542
0.605
0.667
0.730
0.792
0.855
0.917
0.980

Grip Limits

   —

0.203
0.265
0.328
0.390
0.453
0.515
0.578
0.640
0.703

   —
0.479
0.541
0.604
0.666
0.729
0.791
0.854
0.916
0.979
1.041

   —
0.645
0.708
0.770
0.833
0.895
0.958
1.020
1.083
1.145
1.208

0.120
0.156
0.219
0.281
0.344
0.406
0.469
0.531
0.594
0.656
0.719

–02
–03
–04
–05
–06
–07
–08
–09
–10
–11
–12

Grip
Dash
No.

   —
0.146
0.209
0.271
0.334
0.396
0.459
0.521
0.584
0.646
0.709

Overlap
Min

1/16 Range

Min Max
Overlap

Max

Grip Limits

Overlap
Min

1/16 Range

–06
Diameter

L Ref K Max

–08
Diameter

L Ref K Max

4 4

9

Table 1

Table 2

Figure 7-83. Cherry’s titanium Maxibolt. 

Figure 7-84. Accu-Lok ™ installation.

are so hard that standard high-speed steel (HSS) drill bits 
do not last long. Typically, twist drills are used, but brad 
point drills are also available. The Kevlar® fibers are not 
as hard as carbon, and standard HSS drill bits can be used. 
The hole quality can be poor if standard drill bits are used 
and the preferred drill style is the sickle-shaped Klenk drill. 
This drill first pulls on the fibers and then shears them, 
which results in a better quality hole. Larger holes can 
be cut with diamond-coated hole saws or fly cutters, but 
only use fly cutters in a drill press, and not in a drill motor. 
[Figures 7-85, 7-86, and 7-87]


7-51

Figure 7-85. Klenk-type drill for drilling Kevlar®.

Figure 7-86. Drilling and cutting tools for composite materials.

Figure 7-87. Autofeed drill.

Processes and Precautions

Composite materials are drilled with drill motors operating 
between 2,000 and 20,000 rpm and a low feed rate. Drill 
motors with a hydraulic dash pod or other type of feed control 
are preferred because they restrict the surging of the drill 
as it exits the composite materials. This reduces breakout 
damage and delaminations. Parts made from tape products 
are especially susceptible to breakout damage; parts made 
from fabric material have experienced less damage. The 
composite structure needs to be backed with a metal plate 
or sheet to avoid breakout. Holes in composite structures 

are often predrilled with a small pilot hole, enlarged with a 
diamond-coated or carbide drill bit and reamed with a carbide 
reamer to final hole size. 

Back counterboring is a condition that can occur when 
carbon/epoxy parts mate metal substructure parts. The back 
edge of the hole in the carbon/epoxy part can be eroded or 
radiused by metal chips being pulled through the composite. 
The condition is more prevalent when there are gaps between 
the parts or when the metal debris is stringy rather than small 
chips. Back counterboring can be minimized or eliminated 
by changing feeds and speeds, cutter geometry, better part 
clamp-up adding a final ream pass, using a peck drill, or 
combination of these. 

When drilling combinations of composite parts with metal 
parts, the metal parts may govern the drilling speed. For 
example, even though titanium is compatible with carbon/
epoxy material from a corrosion perspective, lower drilling 
speeds are required in order to ensure no metallurgical 
damage occurs to the titanium. Titanium is drilled with low 
speed and high feed. Drill bits suitable for titanium might not 
be suitable for carbon or fiberglass. Drill bits that are used 
for drilling titanium are often made from cobalt-vanadium; 
drill bits used for carbon fiber are made from carbide or 
are diamond coated to increase drill life and to produce an 
accurate hole. Small-diameter high-speed steel drill bits, such 
as No. 40 drill, which are used to manually drill pilot holes, 
are typically used because carbide drills are relatively brittle 
and are easily broken. The relatively low cost of these small 
HSS drill bits offsets the limited life expectancy. High-speed 
steel drill bits may last for only one hole. 

The most common problem with carbide cutters used in hand-
drill operations is handling damage (chipped edges) to the 
cutters. A sharp drill with a slow constant feed can produce 
a 0.1 mm (0.004-inch) tolerance hole through carbon/epoxy 
plus thin aluminum, especially if a drill guide is used. With 
hard tooling, tighter tolerances can be maintained. When the 
structure under the carbon/epoxy is titanium, drills can pull 
titanium chips through the carbon/epoxy and enlarge the hole. 
In this case, a final ream operation may be required to hold 
tight hole tolerances. Carbide reamers are needed for holes 
through carbon/epoxy composite structure. In addition, the 
exit end of the hole needs good support to prevent splintering 
and delaminations when the reamer removes more than 
about 0.13 mm (0.005-inch) on the diameter. The support 
can be the substructure or a board held firmly against the 
back surface. Typical reaming speeds are about one-half of 
the drilling speed.


7-52

Cutting fluids are not normally used or recommended for 
drilling thin (less than 6.3 mm, or 0.25-inch thick) carbon/
epoxy structure. It is good practice to use a vacuum while 
drilling in composite materials to avoid that carbon dust freely 
floats around the work area. 

Countersinking
Countersinking a composite structure is required when 
flush head fasteners are to be installed in the assembly. For 
metallic structures, a 100° included angle shear or tension 
head fastener has been the typical approach. In composite 
structures, two types of fastener are commonly used: a 100° 
included angle tension head fastener or a 130° included angle 
head fastener. The advantage of the 130° head is that the 
fastener head can have about the same diameter as a tension 
head 100° fastener with the head depth of a shear-type head 
100° fastener. For seating flush fasteners in composite parts, 
it is recommended that the countersink cutters be designed 
to produce a controlled radius between the hole and the 
countersink to accommodate the head-to-shank fillet radius 
on the fasteners. In addition, a chamfer operation or a washer 
may be required to provide proper clearance for protruding 
head fastener head-to-shank radii. Whichever head style is 
used, a matching countersink/chamfer must be prepared in 
the composite structure. 

Carbide cutters are used for producing a countersink in 
carbon/epoxy structure. These countersink cutters usually 
have straight flutes similar to those used on metals. For 
Kevlar® fiber/epoxy composites, S-shaped positive rake 
cutting flutes are used. If straight-fluted countersink cutters 
are used, a special thick tape can be applied to the surface 
to allow for a clean cutting of the Kevlar® fibers, but this 
is not as effective as the S-shaped fluted cutters. Use of a 
piloted countersink cutter is recommended because it ensures 
better concentricity between the hole and the countersink and 
decreases the possibility of gaps under the fasteners due to 
misalignment or delaminations of the part. 

Use a microstop countersink gauge to produce consistent 
countersink wells. Do not countersink through more than 70 
percent of the skin depth because a deeper countersink well 
reduces material strength. When a piloted countersink cutter 
is used, the pilot must be periodically checked for wear, as 
wear can cause reduction of concentricity between the hole 
and countersink. This is especially true for countersink cutters 
with only one cutting edge. For piloted countersink cutters, 
position the pilot in the hole and bring the cutter to full rpm 
before beginning to feed the cutter into the hole and preparing 
the countersink. If the cutter is in contact with the composite 
before triggering the drill motor, you may get splintering.

Cutting Processes and Precautions
Cutters that work well for metals would either have a short 
life or produce a poorly cut edge if used for composite 
materials. The cutters that are used for composites vary with 
the composite material that is being cut. The general rule for 
cutting composites is high speed and slow feed.

• Carbon fiber reinforced plastics: Carbon fiber is very 
hard and quickly wears out high speed steel cutters. 
For most trimming and cutting tasks, diamond grit 
cutters are best. Aluminum-oxide or silicon-carbide 
sandpaper or cloth is used for sanding. Silicon-carbide 
lasts longer then aluminum-oxide. Router bits can also 
be made from solid carbide or diamond coated.

• Glass fiber reinforced plastics: Glass fibers, like 
carbon, are very hard and quickly wear out high-speed 
steel cutters. Fiberglass is drilled with the same type 
and material drill bits as carbon fiber. 

• Aramid (Kevlar®) fiber-reinforced plastics: Aramid 
fiber is not as hard as carbon and glass fiber, and cutters 
made from high-speed steel can be used. To prevent 
loose fibers at the edge of aramid composites, hold 
the part and then cut with a shearing action. Aramid 
composites need to be supported with a plastic backup 
plate. The aramid and backup plate are cut through at 
the same time. Aramid fibers are best cut by being 
held in tension and then sheared. There are specially 
shaped cutters that pull on the fibers and then shear 
them. When using scissors to cut aramid fabric or 
prepreg, they must have a shearing edge on one blade 
and a serrated or grooved surface on the other. These 
serrations hold the material from slipping. Sharp blades 
should always be used as they minimize fiber damage. 
Always clean the scissor serrations immediately after 
use so the uncured resin does not ruin the scissors.

Always use safety glasses and other protective equipment 
when using tools and equipment.

Cutting Equipment
The bandsaw is the equipment that is most often used in 
a repair shop for cutting composite materials. A toothless 
carbide or diamond-coated saw blade is recommended. A 
typical saw blade with teeth does not last long if carbon fiber 
or fiberglass is cut. [Figure 7-88] Air-driven hand tools, 
such as routers, saber saws, die grinders, and cut-off wheels 
can be used to trim composite parts. Carbide or diamond-
coated cutting tools produce a better finish and they last 
much longer. Specialized shops have ultrasonic, waterjet, 
and laser cutters. These types of equipment are numerical 
controlled (NC) and produce superior edge and hole quality. 


7-53

Figure 7-88. Bandsaw. 

Figure 7-89. Gerber cutting table.

A waterjet cutter cannot be used for honeycomb structure 
because it introduces water in the part. Do not cut anything 
else on equipment that is used for composites because other 
materials can contaminate the composite material.

Prepreg materials can be cut with a CNC Gerber table. 
The use of this equipment speeds up the cutting process 
and optimizes the use of the material. Design software is 
available that calculates how to cut plies for complex shapes. 
[Figures 7-89]

Repair Safety
Advanced composite materials including prepreg, resin 
systems, cleaning solvents, and adhesives could be 
hazardous, and it is important that you use personal protection 
equipment. It is important to read and understand the Safety 
Data Sheets (SDS) and handle all chemicals, resins, and 
fibers correctly. The SDS lists the hazardous chemicals in 
the material system, and it outlines the hazards. The material 
could be a respiratory irritant or carcinogenic, or another kind 
of dangerous substance.

Eye Protection
Always protect eyes from chemicals and flying objects. Wear 
safety glasses at all times and, when mixing or pouring acids, 
wear a face shield. Never wear corrective contact lenses in a 
shop, even with safety glasses. Some of the chemical solvents 
can melt the lenses and damage eyes. Dust can also get under 
the lenses, causing damage.

Respiratory Protection
Do not breathe carbon fiber dust and always ensure that there 
is a good flow of air where the work is performed. Always use 
equipment to assist in breathing when working in a confined 
space. Use a vacuum near the source of the dust to remove 
the dust from the air. When sanding or applying paint, you 
need a dust mask or a respirator. A properly fitted dust mask 
provides the protection needed. For application of paints, a 
sealed respirator with the correct filters or a fresh air supply 
respirator is required. 

Downdraft Tables

A downdraft table is an efficient and economical device for 
protecting workers from harmful dust caused by sanding and 
grinding operations. The tables are also useful housekeeping 
tools because the majority of particulate material generated 
by machining operations is immediately collected for 
disposal. Downdraft tables should be sized and maintained 
to have an average face velocity between 100 and 150 cubic 
feet per minute. The downdraft table draws contaminants 
like dust and fibers away from the operator’s material. 
Downdraft tables should be monitored and filters changed 
on a regular basis to provide maximum protection and 
particulate collection.

Skin Protection
During composite repair work, protect your skin from 
hazardous materials. Chemicals could remain on hands that 
burn sensitive skin. Always wear gloves and clothing that 
offer protection against toxic materials. Use only approved 
gloves that protect skin and do not contaminate the composite 
material. Always wash hands prior to using the toilet or 
eating. Damaged composite components should be handled 
with care. Single fibers can easily penetrate the skin, splinter 
off, and become lodged in the skin.

Fire Protection
Most solvents are flammable. Close all solvent containers and 
store in a fireproof cabinet when not in use. Make sure that 
solvents are kept away from areas where static electricity can 
occur. Static electricity can occur during sanding operations 
or when bagging material is unrolled. It is preferable to use 
air-driven tools. If electric tools are used, ensure that they 
are the enclosed type. Do not mix too much resin. The resin 


7-54

Figure 7-90. Hanging an acrylic sheet.

could overheat and start smoking caused by the exothermic 
process. Ensure that a fire extinguisher is always nearby.
 
Transparent Plastics
Plastics cover a broad field of organic synthetic resin and 
may be divided into two main classifications: thermoplastics 
and thermosetting plastics.

a. Thermoplastics—may be softened by heat and can be 
dissolved in various organic solvents. Acrylic plastic 
is commonly used as a transparent thermoplastic 
material for windows, canopies, etc. Acrylic plastics 
are known by the trade names of Lucite® or Plexiglas® 
and by the British as Perspex®, and meet the military 
specifications of MIL-P-5425 for regular acrylic and 
MIL-P-8184 for craze-resistant acrylic.

b. Thermosetting plastics—do not soften appreciably 
under heat but may char and blister at temperatures 
of 240–260 °C (400–500 °F). Most of the molded 
products of synthetic resin composition, such 
as phenolic, urea-formaldehyde, and melamine 
formaldehyde resins, belong to the thermosetting 
group. Once the plastic becomes hard, additional heat 
does not change it back into a liquid as it would with 
a thermoplastic.

Optical Considerations
Scratches and other types of damage that obstruct the vision 
of the pilots are not acceptable. Some types of damage might 
be acceptable at the edges of the windshield.

Identification
Storage and Handling
Because transparent thermoplastic sheets soften and deform 
when they are heated, they must be stored where the 
temperature never becomes excessive. Store them in a cool, 
dry location away from heating coils, radiators, or steam 
pipes, and away from such fumes as are found in paint spray 
booths or paint storage areas.

Keep paper-masked transparent sheets out of the direct rays 
of the sun, because sunlight accelerates deterioration of the 
adhesive, causing it to bond to the plastic, and making it 
difficult to remove.

Store plastic sheets with the masking paper in place, in bins 
that are tilted at a 10° angle from the vertical to prevent 
buckling. If the sheets are stored horizontally, take care to 
avoid getting dirt and chips between them. Stacks of sheets 
must never be over 18 inches high, with the smallest sheets 
stacked on top of the larger ones so there is no unsupported 
overhang. Leave the masking paper on the sheets as long as 

possible, and take care not to scratch or gouge the sheets by 
sliding them against each other or across rough or dirty tables.

Store formed sections with ample support so they do not 
lose their shape. Vertical nesting should be avoided. Protect 
formed parts from temperatures higher than 120 °F (49 °C), 
and leave their protective coating in place until they are 
installed on the aircraft.

Forming Procedures and Techniques
Transparent acrylic plastics get soft and pliable when they 
are heated to their forming temperatures and can be formed 
to almost any shape. When they cool, they retain the shape 
to which they were formed. Acrylic plastic may be cold-bent 
into a single curvature if the material is thin and the bending 
radius is at least 180 times the thickness of the sheet. Cold 
bending beyond these limits impose so much stress on the 
surface of the plastic that tiny fissures or cracks, called 
crazing, form.

Heating
Wear cotton gloves when handling the plastic to eliminate 
finger marks on the soft surface. Before heating any 
transparent plastic material, remove all of the masking paper 
and adhesive from the sheet. If the sheet is dusty or dirty, 
wash it with clean water and rinse it well. Dry the sheet 
thoroughly by blotting it with soft absorbent paper towels.

For the best results when hot forming acrylics, adhere to 
the temperatures recommended by the manufacturer. Use 
a forced-air oven that can operate over a temperature range 
of 120–374 °F (49–190 °C). If the part gets too hot during 
the forming process, bubbles may form on the surface and 
impair the optical qualities of the sheet.

For uniform heating, it is best to hang the sheets vertically by 
grasping them by their edges with spring clips and suspending 
the clips in a rack. [Figure 7-90] If the piece is too small to 
hold with clips, or if there is not enough trim area, lay the 


7-55

sheets on shelves or racks covered with soft felt or flannel. Be 
sure there is enough open space to allow the air to circulate 
around the sheet and heat it evenly.

Small forming jobs, such as landing light covers, may be 
heated in a kitchen baking oven. Infrared heat lamps may be 
used if they are arranged on 7- to 8-inch centers and enough 
of them are used in a bank to heat the sheet evenly. Place the 
lamps about 18-inches from the material.

Never use hot water or steam directly on the plastic to heat 
it because this likely causes the acrylic to become milky or 
cloudy.

Forms
Heated acrylic plastic molds with almost no pressure, so the 
forms used can be of very simple construction. Forms made 
of pressed wood, plywood, or plaster are adequate to form 
simple curves, but reinforced plastic or plaster may be needed 
to shape complex or compound curves. Since hot plastic 
conforms to any waviness or unevenness, the form used must 
be completely smooth. To ensure this, sand the form and 
cover it with soft cloth, such as outing flannel or billiard felt. 
The mold should be large enough to extend beyond the trim 
line of the part, and provisions should be made for holding 
the hot plastic snug against the mold as it cools.

A mold can be made for a complex part by using the damaged 
part itself. If the part is broken, tape the pieces together, wax 
or grease the inside so the plaster does not stick to it, and 
support the entire part in sand. Fill the part with plaster and 
allow it to harden, and then remove it from the mold. Smooth 
out any roughness and cover it with soft cloth. It is now ready 
to use to form the new part.

Forming Methods
Simple Curve Forming

Heat the plastic material to the recommended temperature, 
remove it from the heat source, and carefully drape it over 
the prepared form. Carefully press the hot plastic to the form 
and either hold or clamp the sheet in place until it cools. This 
process may take from 10–30 minutes. Do not force cool it.

Compound Curve Forming

Compound curve forming is normally used for canopies or 
complex wingtip light covers, and it requires a great deal 
of specialized equipment. There are four commonly used 
methods, each having its advantages and disadvantages.

Stretch Forming

Preheated acrylic sheets are stretched mechanically over the 
form in much the same way as is done with the simple curved 

piece. Take special care to preserve uniform thickness of the 
material, since some parts must stretch more than others.

Male and Female Die Forming

Male and female die forming requires expensive matching 
male and female dies. The heated plastic sheet is placed 
between the dies that are then mated. When the plastic cools, 
the dies are opened.

Vacuum Forming Without Forms

Many aircraft canopies are formed by this method. In this 
process, a panel, which has cut into it the outline of the desired 
shape, is attached to the top of a vacuum box. The heated 
and softened sheet of plastic is then clamped on top of the 
panel. When the air in the box is evacuated, the outside air 
pressure forces the hot plastic through the opening and forms 
the concave canopy. It is the surface tension of the plastic 
that shapes the canopy.

Vacuum Forming With a Female Form

If the shape needed is other than that which would be formed 
by surface tension, a female mold, or form must be used. It 
is placed below the plastic sheet and the vacuum pump is 
connected. When air from the form is evacuated, the outside 
air pressure forces the hot plastic sheet into the mold and fills it.

Sawing and Drilling
Sawing
Several types of saws can be used with transparent plastics; 
however, circular saws are the best for straight cuts. 
The blades should be hollow ground or have some set to 
prevent binding. After the teeth are set, they should be side 
dressed to produce a smooth edge on the cut. Band saws are 
recommended for cutting flat acrylic sheets when the cuts 
must be curved or where the sheet is cut to a rough dimension 
to be trimmed later. Close control of size and shape may be 
obtained by band sawing a piece to within 1⁄16-inch of the 
desired size, as marked by a scribed line on the plastic, and 
then sanding it to the correct size with a drum or belt sander.

Drilling
Unlike soft metal, acrylic plastic is a very poor conductor of 
heat. Make provisions for removing the heat when drilling. 
Deep holes need cooling, and water-soluble cutting oil is a 
satisfactory coolant since it has no tendency to attack the 
plastic.

The drill used on acrylics must be carefully ground and free 
from nicks and burrs that would affect the surface finish. 
Grind the drill with a greater included angle than would be 
used for soft metal. The rake angle should be zero in order 
to scrape, and not cut. The length of the cutting edge (and 


7-56

Dubbed-off to 
zero rake angle

Slow spiral-polished flutes

Included tip 
angle 140°

Lip clearance 
angle

Figure 7-91. Drill with an included angle of 140° is used to drill 
acrylic plastics.

Figure 7-92. Unibit® drill for drilling acrylic plastics.

hence the width of the lip) can be reduced by increasing the 
included angle of the drill. [Figure 7-91] Whenever holes are 
drilled completely through acrylic, the standard twist drills 
should be modified to a 60° tip angle, the cutting edge to a 
zero rake angle, and the back lip clearance angle increased 
to 12-15°. Drills specially modified for drilling acrylic are 
available from authorized distributors and dealers.

The patented Unibit® is good for drilling small holes in 
aircraft windshields and windows. [Figure 7-92] It can cut 
holes from 1⁄8 to ½-inch in 1⁄32-inch increments and produces 
good smooth holes with no stress cracks around their edges.

Cementing
Polymerizable cements are those in which a catalyst is added 
to an already thick monomer-polymer syrup to promote 
rapid hardening. Cement PS-30® and Weld-On 40® are 
polymerizable cements of this type. They are suitable for 
cementing all types of plexiglas acrylic cast sheet and parts 
molded from plexiglas molding pellets. At room temperature, 
the cements harden (polymerize) in the container in about 
45 minutes after mixing the components. They harden more 
rapidly at higher temperatures. The cement joints are usually 
hard enough for handling within 4 hours after assembly. The 
joints may be machined within 4 hours after assembly, but it 
is better to wait 24 hours.

Application of Cement
PS-30® and Weld-On 40® joints retain excellent appearance 
and color stability after outdoor exposure. These cements 
produce clear, transparent joints and should be used when 
the color and appearance of the joints are important.

PS-30® and Weld-On 40® should be used at temperatures 
no lower than 65 °F. If cementing is done in a room cooler 
than 65 °F, it requires a longer time to harden and the joint 
strength is reduced.

The cement should be prepared with the correct proportions 
of components as given in the manufacturer’s instructions and 
thoroughly mixed, making sure neither the mixing container 
nor mixing paddle adds color or effects the hardening of the 
cement. Clean glass or polyethylene mixing containers are 
preferred. Because of their short pot life (approximately 45 
minutes), Cement PS-30® and Weld-On 40® must be used 
quickly once the components are mixed. Time consumed in 
preparation shortens the effective working time, making it 
necessary to have everything ready to be cemented before 
the cements are mixed. For better handling, pour cement 
within 20 minutes of mixing. For maximum joint strength, 
the final cement joint should be free of bubbles. It is usually 
sufficient to allow the mixed cement to stand for 10 minutes 
before cementing to allow bubbles to rise to the surface. The 
gap joint technique can only be used with colorless plexiglas 
acrylic or in cases where joints are hidden. If inconspicuous 
joints in colored plexiglas acrylic are needed, the parts must 
be fitted closely, using closed V-groove, butt, or arc joints.

Cement forms, or dams, may be made with masking tape as 
long as the adhesive surface does not contact the cement. This 
is easily done with a strip of cellophane tape placed over the 
masking tape adhesive. The tape must be chosen carefully. 
The adhesive on ordinary cellophane tape prevents the cure of 
PS-30® and Weld-On 40®. Before actual fabrication of parts, 
sample joints should be tried to ensure that the tape system 
used does not harm the cement. Since it is important for all 
of the cement to remain in the gap, only contact pressure 
should be used.

Bubbles tend to float to the top of the cement bead in a gap joint 
after the cement is poured. These cause no problem if the bead 
is machined off. A small wire (not copper) or similar object 
may be used to lift some bubbles out of the joint; however, the 
cement joint should be disturbed as little as possible.

Polymerizable cements shrink as the cement hardens. 
Therefore, the freshly poured cement bead should be left 
above the surfaces being cemented to compensate for the 
shrinkage. If it is necessary for appearances, the bead may 
be machined off after the cement has set.


7-57

A

A1

A1

AAll the strains that originally caused the crack are concentrated at point      tending to extend the 
crack. Therefore, with a #30 or 1/8" drill bit, drill a small hole      at the end of the crack point to 
distribute the strain over a wider area.

Each crack occurring at any hole or tear is drilled in the same manner.

Figure 7-93. Stop drilling of cracks.

Repairs
Whenever possible, replace, rather than repair, extensively 
damaged transparent plastic. A carefully patched part is not 
the equal of a new section, either optically or structurally. 
At the first sign of crack development, drill a small hole 
with a #30 or a 1⁄8-inch drill at the extreme ends of the 
cracks. [Figure 7-93] This serves to localize the cracks and 
to prevent further splitting by distributing the strain over a 
large area. If the cracks are small, stopping them with drilled 
holes usually suffices until replacement or more permanent 
repairs can be made. 

Cleaning
Plastics have many advantages over glass for aircraft use, 
but they lack the surface hardness of glass and care must 
be exercised while servicing the aircraft to avoid scratching 
or otherwise damaging the surface. Clean the plastic by 
washing it with plenty of water and mild soap, using a 
clean, soft, grit-free cloth, sponge, or bare hands. Do not use 
gasoline, alcohol, benzene, acetone, carbon tetrachloride, fire 
extinguisher or deicing fluids, lacquer thinners, or window 
cleaning sprays. These soften the plastic and cause crazing.

Plastics should not be rubbed with a dry cloth since it is likely 
to cause scratches and to build up an electrostatic charge that 
attracts dust particles to the surface. If, after removing dirt 
and grease, no great amount of scratching is visible, finish 
the plastic with a good grade of commercial wax. Apply the 
wax in a thin even coat and bring to a high polish by rubbing 
lightly with a soft cloth.

Polishing
Do not attempt hand polishing or buffing until the surface is 
clean. A soft, open-type cotton or flannel buffing wheel is 
suggested. Minor scratches may be removed by vigorously 
rubbing the affected area by hand, using a soft clean cloth 
dampened with a mixture of turpentine and chalk, or by 
applying automobile cleanser with a damp cloth. Remove 
the cleaner and polish with a soft, dry cloth. Acrylic and 

cellulose acetate plastics are thermoplastic. Friction created 
by buffing or polishing too long in one spot can generate 
sufficient heat to soften the surface. This condition produces 
visual distortion and should be avoided.

Windshield Installation
Use material equivalent to that originally used by the 
manufacturer of the aircraft for replacement panels. There 
are many types of transparent plastics on the market. Their 
properties vary greatly, particularly  expansion characteristics, 
brittleness under low temperatures, resistance to discoloration 
when exposed to sunlight, surface checking, etc. Information 
on these properties is in MIL-HDBK-17, Plastics for 
Flight Vehicles, Part II Transparent Glazing Materials, 
available from the Government Printing Office (GPO). 
These properties are considered by aircraft manufacturers 
in selecting materials to be used in their designs and the use 
of substitutes having different characteristics may result in 
subsequent difficulties.

Installation Procedures
When installing a replacement panel, use the same mounting 
method employed by the manufacturer of the aircraft. While 
the actual installation varies from one type of aircraft to 
another, consider the following major principles when 
installing any replacement panel.

1. Never force a plastic panel out of shape to make it fit 
a frame. If a replacement panel does not fit easily into 
the mounting, obtain a new replacement or heat the 
whole panel and re-form. When possible, cut and fit 
a new panel at ordinary room temperature.

2. In clamping or bolting plastic panels into their 
mountings, do not place the plastic under excessive 
compressive stress. It is easy to develop more than 
1,000 psi on the plastic by overtorquing a nut and 
bolt. Tighten each nut to a firm fit, and then back the 
nut off one full turn (until they are snug and can still 
be rotated with the fingers).


7-58

3. In bolted installations, use spacers, collars, shoulders, 
or stop-nuts to prevent tightening the bolt excessively. 
Whenever such devices are used by the aircraft 
manufacturer, retain them in the replacement 
installation. It is important that the original number 
of bolts, complete with washers, spacers, etc., be 
used. When rivets are used, provide adequate spacers 
or other satisfactory means to prevent excessive 
tightening of the frame to the plastic.

4. Mount plastic panels between rubber, cork, or other 
gasket material to make the installation waterproof, to 
reduce vibration, and to help to distribute compressive 
stresses on the plastic.

5. Plastics expand and contract considerably more than 
the metal channels in which they are mounted. Mount 
windshield panels to a sufficient depth in the channel 
to prevent it from falling out when the panel contracts 
at low temperatures or deforms under load. When 
the manufacturer’s original design permits, mount 
panels to a minimum depth of 11⁄8-inches, and with a 
clearance of 1⁄8-inch between the plastic and bottom 
of the channel.

6. In installations involving bolts or rivets, make the 
holes through the plastic oversize by 1⁄8-inch and 
center so that the plastic does not bind or crack at 
the edge of the holes. The use of slotted holes is also 
recommended.

