
1-1

Chapter 1

Aircraft Structures
A Brief History of Aircraft Structures
The history of aircraft structures underlies the history of 
aviation in general. Advances in materials and processes 
used to construct aircraft have led to their evolution from 
simple wood truss structures to the sleek aerodynamic flying 
machines of today. Combined with continuous powerplant 
development, the structures of “flying machines” have 
changed significantly.

The key discovery that “lift” could be created by passing 
air over the top of a curved surface set the development of 
fixed and rotary-wing aircraft in motion. George Cayley 
developed an efficient cambered airfoil in the early 1800s, 
as well as successful manned gliders later in that century. He 
established the principles of flight, including the existence of 
lift, weight, thrust, and drag. It was Cayley who first stacked 
wings and created a tri-wing glider that flew a man in 1853.


1-2

Figure 1-1. George Cayley, the father of aeronautics (top) and a 
flying replica of his 1853 glider (bottom).

Figure 1-2. Master of gliding and wing study, Otto Lilienthal (top) 
and one of his more than 2,000 glider flights (bottom)

Earlier, Cayley studied the center of gravity of flying 
machines, as well as the effects of wing dihedral. Furthermore, 
he pioneered directional control of aircraft by including the 
earliest form of a rudder on his gliders. [Figure 1-1]

In the late 1800s, Otto Lilienthal built upon Cayley’s 
discoveries. He manufactured and flew his own gliders 
on over 2,000 flights. His willow and cloth aircraft had 
wings designed from extensive study of the wings of birds. 
Lilienthal also made standard use of vertical and horizontal 
fins behind the wings and pilot station. Above all, Lilienthal 
proved that man could fly. [Figure 1-2]

Octave Chanute, a retired railroad and bridge engineer, 
was active in aviation during the 1890s. [Figure 1-3] His 
interest was so great that, among other things, he published 
a definitive work called “Progress in Flying Machines.” This 
was the culmination of his effort to gather and study all the  

information available on aviation. With the assistance of 
others, he built gliders similar to Lilienthal’s and then his 
own. In addition to his publication, Chanute advanced aircraft 
structure development by building a glider with stacked wings 
incorporating the use of wires as wing supports. 

The work of all of these men was known to the Wright 
Brothers when they built their successful, powered airplane 
in 1903. The first of its kind to carry a man aloft, the Wright 
Flyer had thin, cloth-covered wings attached to what was 
primarily truss structures made of wood. The wings contained 
forward and rear spars and were supported with both struts 
and wires. Stacked wings (two sets) were also part of the 
Wright Flyer. [Figure 1-4] 


1-3

Figure 1-3. Octave Chanute gathered and published all of the 
aeronautical knowledge known to date in the late 1890s. Many 
early aviators benefited from this knowledge.

Figure 1-5. The world’s first mono-wing by Louis Bleriot. 

Figure 1-4. The Wright Flyer was the first successful powered aircraft. It was made primarily of wood and fabric.

Powered heavier-than-air aviation grew from the Wright 
design. Inventors and fledgling aviators began building their 
own aircraft. Early on, many were similar to that constructed 
by the Wrights using wood and fabric with wires and struts 
to support the wing structure. In 1909, Frenchman Louis 
Bleriot produced an aircraft with notable design differences. 
He built a successful mono-wing aircraft. The wings were 

still supported by wires, but a mast extending above the 
fuselage enabled the wings to be supported from above, as 
well as underneath. This made possible the extended wing 
length needed to lift an aircraft with a single set of wings. 
Bleriot used a Pratt truss-type fuselage frame. [Figure 1-5]

More powerful engines were developed, and airframe 
structures changed to take advantage of the benefits. As 
early as 1910, German Hugo Junkers was able to build an 
aircraft with metal truss construction and metal skin due to 
the availability of stronger powerplants to thrust the plane 
forward and into the sky. The use of metal instead of wood 
for the primary structure eliminated the need for external 
wing braces and wires. His J-1 also had a single set of wings 
(a monoplane) instead of a stacked set. [Figure 1-6]
 


1-4

Figure 1-6. The Junker J-1 all metal construction in 1910.

Figure 1-7. World War I aircraft were typically stacked-wing fabric-
covered aircraft like this Breguet 14 (circa 1917).

Figure 1-8. The flying boat hull was an early semimonocoque design 
like this Curtiss HS-2L. 

Leading up to World War I (WWI), stronger engines also 
allowed designers to develop thicker wings with stronger 
spars. Wire wing bracing was no longer needed. Flatter, lower 
wing surfaces on high-camber wings created more lift. WWI 
expanded the need for large quantities of reliable aircraft. 
Used mostly for reconnaissance, stacked-wing tail draggers 
with wood and metal truss frames with mostly fabric skin 
dominated the wartime sky. [Figure 1-7] The Red Baron’s 
Fokker DR-1 was typical. 

In the 1920s, the use of metal in aircraft construction 
increased. Fuselages able to carry cargo and passengers 
were developed. The early flying boats with their hull-type 
construction from the shipbuilding industry provided the 
blueprints for semimonocoque construction of fuselages. 
[Figure 1-8] Truss-type designs faded. A tendency toward 
cleaner mono-wing designs prevailed.
 
Into the 1930s, all-metal aircraft accompanied new lighter and 
more powerful engines. Larger semimonocoque fuselages 
were complimented with stress-skin wing designs. Fewer 
truss and fabric aircraft were built. World War II (WWII) 
brought about a myriad of aircraft designs using all metal 
technology. Deep fuel-carrying wings were the norm, but the 
desire for higher flight speeds prompted the development of 
thin-winged aircraft in which fuel was carried in the fuselage. 
The first composite structure aircraft, the De Havilland 
Mosquito, used a balsa wood sandwich material in the  

construction of the fuselage. [Figure 1-9] The fiberglass 
radome was also developed during this period.

After WWII, the development of turbine engines led to 
higher altitude flight. The need for pressurized aircraft 
pervaded aviation. Semimonocoque construction needed 
to be made even stronger as a result. Refinements to the 
all-metal semimonocoque fuselage structure were made to 
increase strength and combat metal fatigue caused by the 
pressurization-depressurization cycle. Rounded window 
and door openings were developed to avoid weak areas 
where cracks could form. Integrally machined copper 
alloy aluminum skin resisted cracking and allowed thicker 
skin and controlled tapering. Chemical milling of wing 
skin structures provided great strength and smooth high-


1-5

Figure 1-9. The De Havilland Mosquito used a laminated wood 
construction with a balsa wood core in the fuselage. Figure 1-10. The nearly all composite Cessna Citation Mustang 

very light jet (VLJ).
performance surfaces. Variable contour wings became easier  
to construct. Increases in flight speed accompanying jet travel 
brought about the need for thinner wings. Wing loading also 
increased greatly. Multispar and box beam wing designs were 
developed in response.

In the 1960s, ever larger aircraft were developed to carry 
passengers. As engine technology improved, the jumbo jet 
was engineered and built. Still primarily aluminum with a 
semimonocoque fuselage, the sheer size of the airliners of 
the day initiated a search for lighter and stronger materials 
from which to build them. The use of honeycomb constructed 
panels in Boeing’s airline series saved weight while not 
compromising strength. Initially, aluminum core with 
aluminum or fiberglass skin sandwich panels were used on 
wing panels, flight control surfaces, cabin floor boards, and 
other applications. 

A steady increase in the use of honeycomb and foam core 
sandwich components and a wide variety of composite 
materials characterizes the state of aviation structures from 
the 1970s to the present. Advanced techniques and material 
combinations have resulted in a gradual shift from aluminum 
to carbon fiber and other strong, lightweight materials. These 
new materials are engineered to meet specific performance 
requirements for various components on the aircraft. Many 
airframe structures are made of more than 50 percent 
advanced composites, with some airframes approaching 
100 percent. The term “very light jet” (VLJ) has come to 
describe a new generation of jet aircraft made almost entirely 
of advanced composite materials. [Figure 1-10] It is possible 
that noncomposite aluminum aircraft structures will become 
obsolete as did the methods and materials of construction 
used by Cayley, Lilienthal, and the Wright Brothers. 

General
An aircraft is a device that is used for, or is intended to be used 
for, flight in the air. Major categories of aircraft are airplane, 
rotorcraft, glider, and lighter-than-air vehicles. [Figure 1-11] 
Each of these may be divided further by major distinguishing 
features of the aircraft, such as airships and balloons. Both 
are lighter-than-air aircraft but have differentiating features 
and are operated differently.

The concentration of this handbook is on the airframe of 
aircraft; specifically, the fuselage, booms, nacelles, cowlings, 
fairings, airfoil surfaces, and landing gear. Also included are 
the various accessories and controls that accompany these 
structures. Note that the rotors of a helicopter are considered 
part of the airframe since they are actually rotating wings. 
By contrast, propellers and rotating airfoils of an engine on 
an airplane are not considered part of the airframe.
 
The most common aircraft is the fixed-wing aircraft. As 
the name implies, the wings on this type of flying machine 
are attached to the fuselage and are not intended to move 
independently in a fashion that results in the creation of lift. 
One, two, or three sets of wings have all been successfully 
utilized. [Figure 1-12] Rotary-wing aircraft such as 
helicopters are also widespread. This handbook discusses 
features and maintenance aspects common to both fixed-
wing and rotary-wing categories of aircraft. Also, in certain 
cases, explanations focus on information specific to only 
one or the other. Glider airframes are very similar to fixed-
wing aircraft. Unless otherwise noted, maintenance practices 
described for fixed-wing aircraft also apply to gliders. The 
same is true for lighter-than-air aircraft, although thorough  


1-6

Figure 1-11. Examples of different categories of aircraft, clockwise from top left: lighter-than-air, glider, rotorcraft, and airplane.

Figure 1-12. A monoplane (top), biplane (middle), and tri-wing 
aircraft (bottom).

coverage of the unique airframe structures and maintenance 
practices for lighter-than-air flying machines is not included 
in this handbook.

The airframe of a fixed-wing aircraft consists of five principal 
units: the fuselage, wings, stabilizers, flight control surfaces, 
and landing gear. [Figure 1-13] Helicopter airframes consist 
of the fuselage, main rotor and related gearbox, tail rotor (on 
helicopters with a single main rotor), and the landing gear.

Airframe structural components are constructed from a wide 
variety of materials. The earliest aircraft were constructed 
primarily of wood. Steel tubing and the most common 
material, aluminum, followed. Many newly certified aircraft 
are built from molded composite materials, such as carbon 
fiber. Structural members of an aircraft’s fuselage include 
stringers, longerons, ribs, bulkheads, and more. The main 
structural member in a wing is called the wing spar. 

The skin of aircraft can also be made from a variety of 
materials, ranging from impregnated fabric to plywood, 
aluminum, or composites. Under the skin and attached to 
the structural fuselage are the many components that support 
airframe function. The entire airframe and its components are 
joined by rivets, bolts, screws, and other fasteners. Welding, 
adhesives, and special bonding techniques are also used.

Major Structural Stresses
Aircraft structural members are designed to carry a load or 
to resist stress. In designing an aircraft, every square inch of 
wing and fuselage, every rib, spar, and even each metal fitting 
must be considered in relation to the physical characteristics 
of the material of which it is made. Every part of the aircraft 
must be planned to carry the load to be imposed upon it.  


1-7

Stabilizers

Landing gear

Wings

Powerplant

Flight controls

Fuselage

Flight 
controls

Figure 1-13. Principal airframe units.

The determi nation of such loads is called stress analysis. 
Although planning the design is not the function of the aircraft 
technician, it is, nevertheless, important that the technician 
understand and appreciate the stresses in volved in order to 
avoid changes in the original design through improper repairs.

The term “stress” is often used interchangeably with the 
word “strain.” While related, they are not the same thing. 
External loads or forces cause stress. Stress is a material’s 
internal resistance, or counterforce, that opposes deformation. 
The degree of deformation of a material is strain. When 
a material is subjected to a load or force, that material is 
deformed, regardless of how strong the material is or how 
light the load is.

There are five major stresses [Figure 1-14] to which all 
aircraft are subjected: 

• Tension

• Compression

• Torsion

• Shear

• Bending

Tension is the stress that resists a force that tends to pull 
something apart. [Figure 1-14A] The engine pulls the aircraft 

forward, but air resistance tries to hold it back. The result is 
tension, which stretches the aircraft. The tensile strength of 
a material is measured in pounds per square inch (psi) and is 
calculated by dividing the load (in pounds) re quired to pull the 
material apart by its cross-sec tional area (in square inches).

Compression is the stress that res ists a crushing force. 
[Figure 1-14B] The compressive strength of a material is 
also measured in psi. Compression is the stress that tends to 
shorten or squeeze aircraft parts.

Torsion is the stress that produces twisting. [Figure 1-14C] 
While moving the aircraft forward, the en gine also tends to 
twist it to one side, but other aircraft components hold it on 
course. Thus, torsion is created. The torsion strength of a 
material is its resistance to twisting or torque.

Shear is the stress that resists the force tending to cause 
one layer of a material to slide over an adjacent layer. 
[Figure 1-14D] Two riveted plates in tension subject the 
rivets to a shearing force. Usually, the shearing strength 
of a material is either equal to or less than its tensile or 
compressive strength. Aircraft parts, especially screws, bolts, 
and rivets, are often subject to a shearing force.

Bending stress is a combination of compression and tension. 
The rod in Figure 1-14E has been short ened (compressed) on 


1-8

Compression inside of bend

Tension outside of bend

Shear along imaginary line (dotted)Bent structural member

A. Tension

B. Compression

D. Shear

E. Bending (the combination stress)

C. Torsion

Figure 1-14. The five stresses that may act on an aircraft and its parts. 

the inside of the bend and stretched on the outside of the bend. 
A single member of the structure may be subjected to 
a combination of stresses. In most cases, the struc tural 
members are designed to carry end loads rather than side 
loads. They are designed to be subjected to tension or 
compression rather than bending. 

Strength or resistance to the external loads imposed during 
operation may be the principal requirement in cer tain 
structures. However, there are numerous other characteristics 
in addition to designing to control the five major stresses that 
engineers must consider. For example, cowling, fairings, and 
simi lar parts may not be subject to significant loads requiring 
a high degree of strength. However, these parts must have 
streamlined shapes to meet aerodynamic requirements, such 
as reducing drag or directing airflow.

Fixed-Wing Aircraft
Fuselage
The fuselage is the main structure or body of the fixed-wing 
aircraft. It provides space for cargo, controls, acces sories, 
passengers, and other equipment. In single-engine aircraft, 
the fuselage houses the powerplant. In multiengine aircraft, 
the engines may be either in the fuselage, attached to the 
fuselage, or suspended from the wing structure. There are two 
general types of fuselage construc tion: truss and monocoque.

Truss-Type
A truss is a rigid framework made up of members, such as 
beams, struts, and bars to resist deforma tion by applied loads. 
The truss-framed fuselage is generally covered with fabric. 
The truss-type fuselage frame is usually constructed of steel 


1-9

Longeron

Vertical web members

Diagonal web members

Skin Former

Bulkhead

Skin

Stringer

Bulkhead

Longeron

Figure 1-15. A truss-type fuselage. A Warren truss uses mostly 
diagonal bracing.

Figure 1-16. An airframe using monocoque construction. 

Figure 1-17. The most common airframe construction is 
semimonocoque.

tubing welded together in such a manner that all members 
of the truss can carry both tension and compression loads. 
[Figure 1-15] In some aircraft, principally the light, single-
engine models, truss fuselage frames may be constructed of 
aluminum alloy and may be riveted or bolted into one piece, 
with cross-bracing achieved by using solid rods or tubes.

Monocoque Type
The monocoque (single shell) fuselage relies largely on the 
strength of the skin or covering to carry the primary loads. 
The design may be di vided into two classes: 

1. Monocoque

2.  Semi monocoque

Different por tions of the same fuselage may belong to either 
of the two classes, but most modern aircraft are considered 
to be of semimonocoque type construction. 
 
The true monocoque construction uses formers, frame 
assemblies, and bulkheads to give shape to the fuselage. 
[Figure 1-16] The heaviest of these structural members are 
located at intervals to carry concentrated loads and at points 
where fittings are used to attach other units such as wings, 
powerplants, and stabilizers. Since no other bracing members 
are present, the skin must carry the primary stresses and 
keep the fuselage rigid. Thus, the biggest problem involved 
in mono coque construction is maintaining enough strength 
while keeping the weight within allowable limits.

Semimonocoque Type
To overcome the strength/weight problem of monocoque 
construction, a modification called semi monocoque 
construction was devel oped. It also consists of frame 
assemblies, bulkheads, and formers as used in the monocoque 
design but, additionally, the skin is reinforced by longitudinal 

members called longerons. Longerons usually extend across 
several frame members and help the skin support primary 
bending loads. They are typically made of aluminum alloy 
either of a single piece or a built-up construction.

Stringers are also used in the semimonocoque fuselage. These 
longitudinal members are typically more numerous and lighter 
in weight than the longerons. They come in a variety of shapes 
and are usually made from single piece aluminum alloy 
extrusions or formed aluminum. Stringers have some rigidity 
but are chiefly used for giving shape and for attachment of 
the skin. Stringers and longerons together prevent tension 
and compression from bending the fuselage. [Figure 1-17]


1-10

Figure 1-18. Gussets are used to increase strength.

Other bracing between the longerons and stringers can also 
be used. Often referred to as web members, these additional 
support pieces may be installed vertically or diagonally. It 
must be noted that manufacturers use different nomenclature 
to describe structural members. For example, there is often 
little difference between some rings, frames, and formers. 
One manufacturer may call the same type of brace a ring or 
a frame. Manufacturer instructions and specifications for a 
specific aircraft are the best guides.

The semimonocoque fuselage is constructed primarily of alloys 
of aluminum and magnesium, although steel and titanium are 
sometimes found in areas of high temperatures. Individually, 
not one of the aforementioned components is strong enough 
to carry the loads imposed during flight and landing. But, 
when combined, those components form a strong, rigid 
framework. This is accomplished with gussets, rivets, nuts 
and bolts, screws, and even friction stir welding. A gusset is 
a type of connection bracket that adds strength. [Figure 1-18] 

To summarize, in semimonocoque fuselages, the strong, 
heavy longerons hold the bulkheads and formers, and these, 
in turn, hold the stringers, braces, web members, etc. All are 
designed to be attached together and to the skin to achieve 
the full-strength benefits of semimonocoque design. It is 
important to recognize that the metal skin or covering carries 
part of the load. The fuselage skin thickness can vary with the 
load carried and the stresses sustained at a particular location. 

The advantages of the semimonocoque fuselage are many. 
The bulkheads, frames, stringers, and longerons facilitate the 
de sign and construction of a streamlined fuselage that is both 
rigid and strong. Spreading loads among these structures and 
the skin means no single piece is failure critical. This means 
that a semimonocoque fuselage, because of its stressed-skin 
construction, may with stand considerable damage and still 
be strong enough to hold together.

Fuselages are generally constructed in two or more sections. 
On small aircraft, they are generally made in two or three 
sections, while larger aircraft may be made up of as many as 
six sections or more before being assembled.

Pressurization 
Many aircraft are pressurized. This means that air is pumped 
into the cabin after takeoff and a difference in pressure 
between the air inside the cabin and the air outside the cabin is 
established. This differential is regulated and maintained. In 
this manner, enough oxygen is made available for passengers 
to breathe normally and move around the cabin without 
special equipment at high altitudes. 

Pressurization causes significant stress on the fuselage 
structure and adds to the complexity of design. In addition 
to withstanding the difference in pressure between the air 
inside and outside the cabin, cycling from unpressurized to 
pressurized and back again each flight causes metal fatigue. 
To deal with these impacts and the other stresses of flight, 
nearly all pressurized aircraft are semimonocoque in design. 
Pressurized fuselage structures undergo extensive periodic 
inspections to ensure that any damage is discovered and 
repaired. Repeated weakness or failure in an area of structure 
may require that section of the fuselage be modified or 
redesigned.

Wings
Wing Configurations
Wings are airfoils that, when moved rapidly through the 
air, create lift. They are built in many shapes and sizes. 
Wing design can vary to provide certain desirable flight 
characteristics. Control at various operating speeds, the 
amount of lift generated, balance, and stability all change as 
the shape of the wing is altered. Both the leading edge and 
the trailing edge of the wing may be straight or curved, or 
one edge may be straight and the other curved. One or both 
edges may be tapered so that the wing is narrower at the tip 
than at the root where it joins the fuselage. The wing tip may 
be square, rounded, or even pointed. Figure 1-19 shows a 
number of typical wing leading and trailing edge shapes.

The wings of an aircraft can be attached to the fuselage at 
the top, mid-fuselage, or at the bottom. They may extend 
perpendicular to the horizontal plane of the fuselage or can 
angle up or down slightly. This angle is known as the wing 
dihedral. The dihedral angle affects the lateral stability of 
the aircraft. Figure 1-20 shows some common wing attach 
points and dihedral angle.


1-11

Tapered leading edge, 
straight trailing edge

Tapered leading and
 trailing edges

Delta wing

Sweptback wings
Straight leading and

 trailing edges
Straight leading edge, 
tapered trailing edge

Low wing Dihedral

High wing Mid wing

Gull wing Inverted gull

Figure 1-19. Various wing design shapes yield different performance. 

Figure 1-20. Wing attach points and wing dihedrals.

Wing Structure
The wings of an aircraft are designed to lift it into the air. 
Their particular design for any given aircraft depends on a 
number of factors, such as size, weight, use of the aircraft, 
desired speed in flight and at landing, and desired rate of 
climb. The wings of aircraft are designated left and right, 
corresponding to the left and right sides of the operator when 
seated in the cockpit. [Figure 1-21]

Often wings are of full cantilever design. This means they 
are built so that no external bracing is needed. They are 
supported internally by structural members assisted by the 
skin of the aircraft. Other aircraft wings use external struts 
or wires to assist in supporting the wing and carrying the 
aerodynamic and landing loads. Wing support cables and 
struts are generally made from steel. Many struts and their 


1-12

Left wing
Right wing

Semicantilever
Wire braced biplane

Long struts braced with jury struts

Full cantilever

Figure 1-21. “Left” and “right” on an aircraft are oriented to the perspective of a pilot sitting in the cockpit. 

Figure 1-22. Externally braced wings, also called semicantilever wings, have wires or struts to support the wing. Full cantilever wings 
have no external bracing and are supported internally. 

bulkheads running chordwise (leading edge to trailing edge). 
The spars are the principle structural members of a wing. 
They support all distributed loads, as well as concentrated 
weights such as the fuselage, landing gear, and engines. The 
skin, which is attached to the wing structure, carries part of 
the loads imposed during flight. It also transfers the stresses 
to the wing ribs. The ribs, in turn, transfer the loads to the 
wing spars. [Figure 1-23]

In general, wing construction is based on one of three 
fundamental designs: 

1. Monospar

2. Multispar

3. Box beam

Modification of these basic designs may be adopted by 
various manufacturers.

The monospar wing incorporates only one main spanwise or 
longitudinal member in its construction. Ribs or bulkheads 

attach fittings have fairings to reduce drag. Short, nearly 
vertical supports called jury struts are found on struts that 
attach to the wings a great distance from the fuselage. This 
serves to subdue strut movement and oscillation caused by 
the air flowing around the strut in flight. Figure 1-22 shows 
samples of wings using external bracing, also known as 
semicantilever wings. Cantilever wings built with no external 
bracing are also shown.
 
Aluminum is the most common material from which 
to construct wings, but they can be wood covered with 
fabric, and occasionally a magnesium alloy has been used. 
Moreover, modern aircraft are tending toward lighter and 
stronger materials throughout the airframe and in wing 
construction. Wings made entirely of carbon fiber or other 
composite materials exist, as well as wings made of a 
combination of materials for maximum strength to weight 
performance. 

The internal structures of most wings are made up of spars 
and stringers running spanwise and ribs and formers or 


1-13

Stringer

Skin

Nose rib

Front spar

Rear sparRibs

Ribs

Figure 1-23. Wing structure nomenclature.

Figure 1-24. Box beam construction.

supply the necessary contour or shape to the airfoil. Although 
the strict monospar wing is not common, this type of design 
modified by the addition of false spars or light shear webs 
along the trailing edge for support of control surfaces is 
sometimes used.

The multispar wing incorporates more than one main 
longitudinal member in its construction. To give the wing 
contour, ribs or bulkheads are often included.

The box beam type of wing construction uses two main 
longitudinal members with connecting bulkheads to 
furnish additional strength and to give contour to the wing. 
[Figure 1-24] A corrugated sheet may be placed between 
the bulkheads and the smooth outer skin so that the wing 
can better carry tension and compression loads. In some 
cases, heavy longitudinal stiffeners are substituted for the 
upper surface of the wing and stiffeners on the lower surface 

corrugated sheets. A combination of corrugated sheets on the 
upper surface of the wing and stiffeners on the lower surface 
is sometimes used. Air transport category aircraft often utilize 
box beam wing construction. 

Wing Spars
Spars are the principal structural members of the wing. They 
correspond to the longerons of the fuse lage. They run parallel 
to the lateral axis of the aircraft, from the fuselage toward 
the tip of the wing, and are usually attached to the fuselage 
by wing fittings, plain beams, or a truss.

Spars may be made of metal, wood, or composite materials 
depending on the design criteria of a specific aircraft. 
Wooden spars are usually made from spruce. They can be 
generally classified into four different types by their cross-
sectional configu ration. As shown in Figure 1-25, they may 
be (A) solid, (B) box-shaped, (C) partly hollow, or (D) in 


1-14

A B C D E

Figure 1-25. Typical wooden wing spar cross-sections. 

Figure 1-26. Examples of metal wing spar shapes. 

the form of an I-beam. Lamination of solid wood spars is  
often used to increase strength. Laminated wood can also be 
found in box-shaped spars. The spar in Figure 1-25E has had 
material removed to reduce weight but retains the strength 
of a rectangular spar. As can be seen, most wing spars are 
basically rectangular in shape with the long dimension of the 
cross-section oriented up and down in the wing. 

Currently, most manufactured aircraft have wing spars 
made of solid extruded aluminum or aluminum extrusions 
riveted together to form the spar. The increased use of 
composites and the combining of materials should make 
airmen vigilant for wings spars made from a variety of 
materials. Figure 1-26 shows examples of metal wing spar 
cross-sections. 

In an I–beam spar, the top and bottom of the I–beam are 
called the caps and the vertical section is called the web. 
The entire spar can be extruded from one piece of metal 
but often it is built up from multiple extrusions or formed 
angles. The web forms the principal depth portion of the 
spar and the cap strips (extrusions, formed angles, or milled 
sections) are attached to it. Together, these members carry 

the loads caused by wing bending, with the caps providing a  
foundation for attaching the skin. Although the spar shapes 
in Figure 1-26 are typi cal, actual wing spar configura tions 
assume many forms. For example, the web of a spar may be 
a plate or a truss as shown in Figure 1-27. It could be built up 
from lightweight materials with vertical stiffeners employed 
for strength. [Figure 1-28] 

It could also have no stiffeners but might contain flanged 
holes for reducing weight but maintaining strength. Some 
metal and composite wing spars retain the I-beam concept 
but use a sine wave web. [Figure 1-29]

Additionally, fail-safe spar web design exists. Fail-safe 
means that should one member of a complex structure fail, 
some other part of the structure assumes the load of the failed 
member and permits continued operation. A spar with fail-
safe construction is shown in Figure 1-30. This spar is made 
in two sections. The top section consists of a cap riveted to 
the upper web plate. The lower section is a single extrusion 
consisting of the lower cap and web plate. These two sections 
are spliced together to form the spar. If either section of this 


1-15

Lower cap member

Upper cap member
Diagonal tube

Vertical tube

Lower spar cap

Upper spar cap

Rib attach angle

Stiffener

Caps

Sine wave web

Lower spar cap

Upper spar cap

Rivets
Splice

Lower spar web

Upper spar web

Figure 1-27. A truss wing spar.

Figure 1-28. A plate web wing spar with vertical stiffeners. 

Figure 1-30. A fail-safe spar with a riveted spar web. 

Figure 1-29. A sine wave wing spar can be made from aluminum 
or composite materials. 

type of spar breaks, the other section can still carry the load. 
This is the fail-safe feature.

As a rule, a wing has two spars. One spar is usually located 
near the front of the wing, and the other about two-thirds of 
the distance toward the wing’s trailing edge. Regardless of 
type, the spar is the most important part of the wing. When 

other structural members of the wing are placed under load, 
most of the resulting stress is passed on to the wing spar.

False spars are commonly used in wing design. They are 
longitudinal members like spars but do not extend the entire 
spanwise length of the wing. Often, they are used as hinge 
attach points for control surfaces, such as an aileron spar.

Wing Ribs
Ribs are the structural crosspieces that combine with spars 
and stringers to make up the framework of the wing. They 
usually extend from the wing leading edge to the rear spar 
or to the trailing edge of the wing. The ribs give the wing 
its cambered shape and transmit the load from the skin and 
stringers to the spars. Similar ribs are also used in ailerons, 
elevators, rudders, and stabilizers. 

Wing ribs are usually manufactured from either wood or 
metal. Aircraft with wood wing spars may have wood or 
metal ribs while most aircraft with metal spars have metal 
ribs. Wood ribs are usually manufactured from spruce. The 
three most common types of wooden ribs are the plywood 
web, the lightened plywood web, and the truss types. Of these 
three, the truss type is the most efficient because it is strong 
and lightweight, but it is also the most complex to construct. 

Figure 1-31 shows wood truss web ribs and a lightened 
plywood web rib. Wood ribs have a rib cap or cap strip 
fastened around the entire perimeter of the rib. It is usually 
made of the same material as the rib itself. The rib cap stiffens 
and strengthens the rib and provides an attaching surface 
for the wing covering. In Figure 1-31A, the cross-section 
of a wing rib with a truss-type web is illustrated. The dark 
rectangular sections are the front and rear wing spars. Note that 
to reinforce the truss, gussets are used. In Figure 1-31B, a truss 
web rib is shown with a continuous gusset. It provides greater 
support throughout the entire rib with very little additional 


1-16

Wing tip Front spar

Leading edge strip

Drag wire or tie rod

Nose rib or false rib

Anti-drag wire or tie rod

Aileron

False spar or aileron spar

Wing butt rib (or compression rib or bulkhead rib)

Wing rib or plain rib

Wing attach fittings

Rear spar

Aileron hinge

A

B

C

Figure 1-31. Examples of wing ribs constructed of wood. 

Figure 1-32. Basic wood wing structure and components.

weight. A continuous gusset stiffens the cap strip in the plane 
of the rib. This aids in preventing buckling and helps to obtain 
better rib/skin joints where nail-gluing is used. Such a rib can 
resist the driving force of nails better than the other types.  
Continuous gussets are also more easily handled than the many 
small separate gussets otherwise required. Figure 1-31C shows 
a rib with a lighten plywood web. It also contains gussets to 
support the web/cap strip interface. The cap strip is usually 
laminated to the web, especially at the leading edge.

A wing rib may also be referred to as a plain rib or a main rib. 
Wing ribs with specialized locations or functions are given 

names that reflect their uniqueness. For example, ribs that 
are located entirely forward of the front spar that are used to 
shape and strengthen the wing leading edge are called nose 
ribs or false ribs. False ribs are ribs that do not span the entire 
wing chord, which is the distance from the leading edge to 
the trailing edge of the wing. Wing butt ribs may be found 
at the inboard edge of the wing where the wing attaches 
to the fuselage. Depending on its location and method of 
attachment, a butt rib may also be called a bulkhead rib or 
a compression rib if it is designed to receive compression 
loads that tend to force the wing spars together. 

Since the ribs are laterally weak, they are strengthened in some 
wings by tapes that are woven above and below rib sections 
to prevent sidewise bending of the ribs. Drag and anti-drag 
wires may also be found in a wing. In Figure 1-32, they are 
shown criss crossed between the spars to form a truss to resist 
forces acting on the wing in the direction of the wing chord. 
These tension wires are also referred to as tie rods. The wire 
designed to resist the back ward forces is called a drag wire; 
the anti-drag wire resists the forward forces in the chord 
direction. Figure 1-32 illustrates the structural components 
of a basic wood wing.

At the inboard end of the wing spars is some form of wing 
attach fitting as illustrated in Figure 1-32. These provide 
a strong and secure method for attaching the wing to the 
fuselage. The interface between the wing and fuselage is often 


1-17

Access panel Upper skin

Wing tip navigation light

Wing cap

Leading edge outer skin

Corrugated inner skin

Reflector rod Heat duct

Louver

Points of attachment to front and rear
spar fittings (2 upper, 2 lower)

Figure 1-33. Wing root fairings smooth airflow and hide wing 
attach fittings. 

Figure 1-34. A removable metal wing tip. 

covered with a fairing to achieve smooth airflow in this area. 
The fairing(s) can be removed for access to the wing attach 
fittings. [Figure 1-33]

The wing tip is often a removable unit, bolted to the outboard 
end of the wing panel. One reason for this is the vulnerability 

of the wing tips to damage, especially during ground handling 
and taxiing. Figure 1-34 shows a removable wing tip for a 
large aircraft wing. Others are different. The wing tip assembly 
is of aluminum alloy construction. The wing tip cap is secured 
to the tip with countersunk screws and is secured to the 
interspar structure at four points with ¼-inch diameter bolts.
To prevent ice from forming on the leading edge of the wings 
of large aircraft, hot air from an engine is often channeled 
through the leading edge from wing root to wing tip. A louver 
on the top surface of the wing tip allows this warm air to be 
exhausted overboard. Wing position lights are located at the 
center of the tip and are not directly visible from the cockpit. 
As an indication that the wing tip light is operating, some 
wing tips are equipped with a Lucite rod to transmit the light 
to the leading edge.

Wing Skin
Often, the skin on a wing is designed to carry part of the 
flight and ground loads in combination with the spars and 
ribs. This is known as a stressed-skin design. The all-metal, 
full cantilever wing section illustrated in Figure 1-35 shows 
the structure of one such design. The lack of extra internal 


1-18

Sealed structure fuel tank—wet wing

Figure 1-35. The skin is an integral load carrying part of a stressed skin design.

Figure 1-36. Fuel is often carried in the wings.

or external bracing requires that the skin share some of the 
load. Notice the skin is stiffened to aid with this function.

Fuel is often carried inside the wings of a stressed-skin 
aircraft. The joints in the wing can be sealed with a special 
fuel resistant sealant enabling fuel to be stored directly inside 
the structure. This is known as wet wing design. Alternately, 
a fuel-carrying bladder or tank can be fitted inside a wing. 
Figure 1-36 shows a wing section with a box beam structural 
design such as one that might be found in a transport category 
aircraft. This structure increases strength while reducing 
weight. Proper sealing of the structure allows fuel to be stored 
in the box sections of the wing. 

The wing skin on an aircraft may be made from a wide variety 
of materials such as fabric, wood, or aluminum. But a single 
thin sheet of material is not always employed. Chemically 

milled aluminum skin can provide skin of varied thicknesses. 
On aircraft with stressed-skin wing design, honeycomb 
structured wing panels are often used as skin. A honeycomb 
structure is built up from a core material resembling a bee 
hive’s honeycomb which is laminated or sandwiched between 
thin outer skin sheets. Figure 1-37 illustrates honeycomb 
panes and their components. Panels formed like this are 
lightweight and very strong. They have a variety of uses 
on the aircraft, such as floor panels, bulkheads, and control 
surfaces, as well as wing skin panels. Figure 1-38 shows the 
locations of honeycomb construction wing panels on a jet 
transport aircraft.

A honeycomb panel can be made from a wide variety of 
materials. Aluminum core honeycomb with an outer skin of 
aluminum is common. But honeycomb in which the core is 


1-19

A

B

Skin

SkinCore

Core

Skin

Skin

Constant thickness

Tapered core

Figure 1-37. The honeycomb panel is a staple in aircraft construction.  Cores can be either constant thickness (A) or tapered (B).  Tapered 
core honeycomb panels are frequently used as flight control surfaces and wing trailing edges.

an Arimid® fiber and the outer sheets are coated Phenolic® 
is common as well. In fact, a myriad of other material 
combinations such as those using fiberglass, plastic, Nomex®, 
Kevlar®, and carbon fiber all exist. Each honeycomb 
structure possesses unique characteristics depending upon 
the materials, dimensions, and manufacturing techniques 
employed. Figure 1-39 shows an entire wing leading edge 
formed from honeycomb structure.

Nacelles
Nacelles (sometimes called “pods”) are streamlined 
enclosures used primarily to house the engine and its 
components. They usually present a round or elliptical 
profile to the wind thus reducing aerodynamic drag. On 
most single-engine aircraft, the engine and nacelle are at the 
forward end of the fuselage. On multiengine aircraft, engine 
nacelles are built into the wings or attached to the fuselage 

at the empennage (tail section). Occasionally, a multiengine 
aircraft is designed with a nacelle in line with the fuselage aft 
of the passenger compartment. Regardless of its location, a 
nacelle contains the engine and accessories, engine mounts, 
structural members, a firewall, and skin and cowling on the 
exterior to fare the nacelle to the wind.

Some aircraft have nacelles that are designed to house the 
landing gear when retracted. Retracting the gear to reduce 
wind resistance is standard procedure on high-performance/
high-speed aircraft. The wheel well is the area where the 
landing gear is attached and stowed when retracted. Wheel 
wells can be located in the wings and/or fuselage when not 
part of the nacelle. Figure 1-40 shows an engine nacelle 
incorporating the landing gear with the wheel well extending 
into the wing root.


1-20

Outboard flap

Trailing edge sandwich panels

constant-thickness core

Spoiler sandwich panel

tapered core, solid wedge

Trailing edge sandwich panels

constant-thickness core

Wing leading edge

Inboard flap

Spoiler sandwich panel

tapered core, solid wedge

Aileron tab sandwich panel

tapered core, Phenolic wedge

Aileron tab sandwich panel

constant-thickness core
Trailing edge wedge sandwich panel

tapered core, cord wedge

Figure 1-38. Honeycomb wing construction on a large jet transport aircraft.

The framework of a nacelle usually consists of structural 
members similar to those of the fuselage. Lengthwise 
members, such as longerons and stringers, combine with 
horizontal/vertical members, such as rings, formers, and 
bulkheads, to give the nacelle its shape and structural 
integrity. A firewall is incorporated to isolate the engine 
compartment from the rest of the aircraft. This is basically a 
stainless steel or titanium bulkhead that contains a fire in the 
confines of the nacelle rather than letting it spread throughout 
the airframe. [Figure 1-41]

Engine mounts are also found in the nacelle. These are 
the structural assemblies to which the engine is fastened. 
They are usually constructed from chrome/molybdenum 
steel tubing in light aircraft and forged chrome/nickel/
molybdenum assemblies in larger aircraft. [Figure 1-42]

The exterior of a nacelle is covered with a skin or fitted with 
a cowling which can be opened to access the engine and 

components inside. Both are usually made of sheet aluminum 
or magnesium alloy with stainless steel or titanium alloys 
being used in high-temperature areas, such as around the 
exhaust exit. Regardless of the material used, the skin is 
typically attached to the framework with rivets.

Cowling refers to the detachable panels covering those areas 
into which access must be gained regularly, such as the engine 
and its accessories. It is designed to provide a smooth airflow 
over the nacelle and to protect the engine from damage. Cowl 
panels are generally made of aluminum alloy construction. 
However, stainless steel is often used as the inner skin aft 
of the power section and for cowl flaps and near cowl flap 
openings. It is also used for oil cooler ducts. Cowl flaps are 
moveable parts of the nacelle cowling that open and close 
to regulate engine temperature. 

There are many engine cowl designs. Figure 1-43 shows an 
exploded view of the pieces of cowling for a horizontally 


1-21

Metal member bonded to sandwich

Wooden members spanwise and chordwise

Glass reinforced plastics sandwich the core

Honeycomb sandwich core

Metal wing spar

Figure 1-39. A wing leading edge formed from honeycomb material bonded to the aluminum spar structure. 

Figure 1-40. Engine nacelle incorporating the landing gear with the wheel well extending into the wing root.


1-22

Figure 1-41. An engine nacelle firewall.

Figure 1-42. Various aircraft engine mounts. 

Figure 1-43. Typical cowling for a horizontally opposed 
reciprocating engine.

opposed engine on a light aircraft. It is attached to the nacelle 
by means of screws and/or quick release fasteners. Some 
large reciprocating engines are enclosed by “orange peel” 
cowlings which provide excellent access to components 
inside the nacelle. [Figure 1-44] These cowl panels are 
attached to the forward firewall by mounts which also serve 
as hinges for opening the cowl. The lower cowl mounts are 
secured to the hinge brackets by quick release pins. The side 
and top panels are held open by rods and the lower panel is 
retained in the open position by a spring and a cable. All of 
the cowling panels are locked in the closed position by over-
center steel latches which are secured in the closed position 
by spring-loaded safety catches.

An example of a turbojet engine nacelle can be seen in 
Figure 1-45. The cowl panels are a combination of fixed 
and easily removable panels which can be opened and closed 
during maintenance. A nose cowl is also a feature on a jet 
engine nacelle. It guides air into the engine.

Empennage 
The empennage of an aircraft is also known as the tail 
section. Most empennage designs consist of a tail cone, 
fixed aerodynamic surfaces or stabilizers, and movable 
aerodynamic surfaces.

The tail cone serves to close and streamline the aft end of 
most fuselages. The cone is made up of structural members 
like those of the fuselage; however, cones are usually of 
lighter con struction since they receive less stress than the 
fuselage. [Figure 1-46]


1-23

Figure 1-44. Orange peel cowling for large radial reciprocating engine.

Figure 1-45. Cowling on a transport category turbine engine nacelle.


1-24

Skin

Bulkhead

Frame

Stringer

Longeron

Elevator

Rudder

Trim tabs

Vertical stabilizer

Horizontal stabilizer

SkinSpars

Rib

Stringer

Figure 1-46. The fuselage terminates at the tail cone with similar 
but more lightweight construction. 

Figure 1-47. Components of a typical empennage.

Figure 1-48. Vertical stabilizer. 

The other components of the typical empennage are of 
heavier construction than the tail cone. These members 
include fixed surfaces that help stabilize the aircraft and 
movable surfaces that help to direct an aircraft during flight. 
The fixed surfaces are the horizon tal stabilizer and vertical 
stabilizer. The movable surfaces are usually a rudder located 
at the aft edge of the vertical stabilizer and an elevator located 
at the aft edge the horizontal stabilizer. [Figure 1-47]

The structure of the stabilizers is very similar to that which 
is used in wing construction. Figure 1-48 shows a typical 
vertical stabilizer. Notice the use of spars, ribs, stringers, 
and skin like those found in a wing. They perform the 
same functions shaping and supporting the stabilizer and 
transferring stresses. Bending, torsion, and shear created 
by air loads in flight pass from one structural member to  
another. Each member absorbs some of the stress and passes 

the remainder on to the others. Ultimately, the spar transmits 
any overloads to the fuselage. A horizontal stabilizer is built 
the same way.

The rudder and elevator are flight control surfaces that are 
also part of the empennage discussed in the next section of 
this chapter.

Flight Control Surfaces
The directional control of a fixed-wing aircraft takes place 
around the lateral, longitudinal, and vertical axes by means 
of flight control surfaces designed to create movement about 
these axes. These control devices are hinged or movable 
surfaces through which the attitude of an aircraft is controlled 
during takeoff, flight, and landing. They are usually divided 
into two major groups: 1) pri mary or main flight control 
surfaces and 2) secondary or auxiliary control surfaces.

Primary Flight Control Surfaces
The primary flight control surfaces on a fixed-wing aircraft 
include: ailerons, elevators, and the rudder. The ailerons are 
attached to the trailing edge of both wings and when moved, 
rotate the aircraft around the longitudinal axis. The elevator 
is attached to the trailing edge of the horizontal stabilizer. 
When it is moved, it alters aircraft pitch, which is the attitude 
about the horizontal or lateral axis. The rudder is hinged to 
the trailing edge of the vertical stabilizer. When the rudder 
changes position, the aircraft rotates about the vertical axis 
(yaw). Figure 1-49 shows the primary flight controls of a 
light aircraft and the movement they create relative to the 
three axes of flight.


1-25

Lateral axis 

(longitudinal

stability) Aile
ron—

Roll

Rudder—YawElevator—
Pitch

Long
itudin

al 

axis (
latera

l 

stabi
lity)

Vertical axis
(directional 
stability)

Aileron Roll Longitudinal Lateral

Rudder Yaw Vertical Directional

Elevator/
Stabilator Pitch Lateral Longitudinal

Primary
Control
Surface

Airplane 
Movement

Axes of 
Rotation

Type of 
Stability

Lightning holeSpar

Actuating horn

Aileron hinge-pin fitting

Figure 1-49. Flight control surfaces move the aircraft around the 
three axes of flight. 

Figure 1-50. Typical structure of an aluminum flight control surface. 

Figure 1-51. Composite control surfaces and some of the many 
aircraft that utilize them. 

Primary control surfaces are usually similar in construc tion 
to one another and vary only in size, shape, and methods of 
attachment. On aluminum light aircraft, their structure is 
often similar to an all-metal wing. This is appropriate because 
the primary control surfaces are simply smaller aerodynamic 
devices. They are typically made from an aluminum alloy 
structure built around a sin gle spar member or torque tube to 
which ribs are fitted and a skin is attached. The lightweight 
ribs are, in many cases, stamped out from flat aluminum sheet 
stock. Holes in the ribs lighten the assembly. An aluminum 
skin is attached with rivets. Figure 1-50 illustrates this type of 
structure, which can be found on the primary control surfaces 
of light aircraft as well as on medium and heavy aircraft.

Primary control surfaces constructed from composite 
materials are also commonly used. These are found on many 
heavy and high-performance aircraft, as well as gliders, 
home-built, and light-sport aircraft. The weight and strength 
advantages over traditional construction can be significant. 
A wide variety of materials and construction techniques are 
employed. Figure 1-51 shows examples of aircraft that use 
composite technology on primary flight control surfaces. 
Note that the control surfaces of fabric-covered aircraft 
often have fabric-covered surfaces just as aluminum-skinned 
(light) aircraft typically have all-aluminum control surfaces. 
There is a critical need for primary control surfaces to 
be balanced so they do not vibrate or flutter in the wind.  


1-26

Down aileron

Up aileron

Stop

Stop

To ailerons

Elevator cables

Tether stop

Note pivots not on center of shaft

Figure 1-53. Aileron location on various wings.

Figure 1-52. Aileron hinge locations are very close to but aft of the 
center of gravity to prevent flutter.

Figure 1-54. Differential aileron control movement. When one aileron 
is moved down, the aileron on the opposite wing is deflected upward. 

Figure 1-55. Transferring control surface inputs from the cockpit. 

Performed to manufacturer’s instructions, balancing usually 
consists of assuring that the center of gravity of a particular 
device is at or forward of the hinge point. Failure to properly 
balance a control surface could lead to catastrophic failure. 
Figure 1-52 illustrates several aileron configurations with 
their hinge points well aft of the leading edge. This is a 
common design feature used to prevent flutter. 

Ailerons
Ailerons are the primary flight control surfaces that move the 
aircraft about the longitudinal axis. In other words, movement 
of the ailerons in flight causes the aircraft to roll. Ailerons 
are usually located on the outboard trailing edge of each of 
the wings. They are built into the wing and are calculated as 
part of the wing’s surface area. Figure 1-53 shows aileron 
locations on various wing tip designs.

Ailerons are controlled by a side-to-side motion of the control 
stick in the cockpit or a rotation of the control yoke. When 
the aileron on one wing deflects down, the aileron on the 
opposite wing deflects upward. This amplifies the movement 
of the aircraft around the longitudinal axis. On the wing on 
which the aileron trailing edge moves downward, camber is 
increased, and lift is increased. Conversely, on the other wing, 
the raised aileron decreases lift. [Figure 1-54] The result is 

a sensitive response to the control input to roll the aircraft.
The pilot’s request for aileron movement and roll are 
transmitted from the cockpit to the actual control surface in a 
variety of ways depending on the aircraft. A system of control 
cables and pulleys, push-pull tubes, hydraulics, electric, or a 
combination of these can be employed. [Figure 1-55] 

Simple, light aircraft usually do not have hydraulic or electric 
fly-by-wire aileron control. These are found on heavy and 
high-performance aircraft. Large aircraft and some high-
performance aircraft may also have a second set of ailerons 
located inboard on the trailing edge of the wings. These 
are part of a complex system of primary and secondary 
control surfaces used to provide lateral control and stability 
in flight. At low speeds, the ailerons may be augmented by 
the use of flaps and spoilers. At high speeds, only inboard 
aileron deflection is required to roll the aircraft while the 


1-27

Inboard aileron

Outboard aileron

Flight spoilers

Figure 1-56. Typical flight control surfaces on a transport category aircraft.

other control surfaces are locked out or remain stationary. 
Figure 1-56 illustrates the location of the typical flight control 
surfaces found on a transport category aircraft.

Elevator
The elevator is the primary flight control surface that moves 
the aircraft around the horizontal or lateral axis. This causes the 
nose of the aircraft to pitch up or down. The elevator is hinged 
to the trailing edge of the horizontal stabilizer and typically 
spans most or all of its width. It is controlled in the cockpit 
by pushing or pulling the control stick or yoke forward or aft.

Light aircraft use a system of control cables and pulleys or 
push-pull tubes to transfer cockpit inputs to the movement 
of the elevator. High-performance and large aircraft 
typically employ more complex systems. Hydraulic power 
is commonly used to move the elevator on these aircraft. On 
aircraft equipped with fly-by-wire controls, a combination 
of electrical and hydraulic power is used.

Rudder 
The rudder is the primary control surface that causes an 
aircraft to yaw or move about the vertical axis. This provides 
directional control and thus points the nose of the aircraft 
in the direction desired. Most aircraft have a single rudder 
hinged to the trailing edge of the vertical stabilizer. It is 
controlled by a pair of foot-operated rudder pedals in the 
cockpit.  When the right pedal is pushed forward, it deflects 

the rudder to the right which moves the nose of the aircraft 
to the right. The left pedal is rigged to simultaneously move 
aft. When the left pedal is pushed forward, the nose of the 
aircraft moves to the left.

As with the other primary flight controls, the transfer of the 
movement of the cockpit controls to the rudder varies with 
the complexity of the aircraft.  Many aircraft incorporate the 
directional movement of the nose or tail wheel into the rudder 
control system for ground operation. This allows the operator 
to steer the aircraft with the rudder pedals during taxi when 
the airspeed is not high enough for the control surfaces to be 
effective. Some large aircraft have a split rudder arrangement. 
This is actually two rudders, one above the other. At low 
speeds, both rudders deflect in the same direction when the 
pedals are pushed.  At higher speeds, one of the rudders 
becomes inoperative as the deflection of a single rudder is 
aerodynamically sufficient to maneuver the aircraft.

Dual Purpose Flight Control Surfaces
The ailerons, elevators, and rudder are considered 
conventional primary control surfaces. However, some 
aircraft are designed with a control surface that may serve a 
dual purpose. For example, elevons perform the combined 
functions of the ailerons and the elevator. [Figure 1-57]

A movable horizontal tail section, called a stabilator, is a 
control surface that combines the action of both the horizontal 


1-28

Ruddervator

Flaperons

Elevons

Figure 1-57. Elevons. 

Figure 1-59. Ruddervator. 

Figure 1-58. A stabilizer and index marks on a transport category 
aircraft.

Figure 1-60. Flaperons.

stabilizer and the elevator. [Figure 1-58] Basically, a  
stabilator is a horizontal stabilizer that can also be rotated 
about the horizontal axis to affect the pitch of the aircraft.

A ruddervator combines the action of the rudder and elevator. 
[Figure 1-59] This is possible on aircraft with V–tail 
empennages where the traditional horizontal and vertical 
stabilizers do not exist. Instead, two stabilizers angle upward 
and outward from the aft fuselage in a “V” configuration. 

Each contains a movable ruddervator built into the trailing 
edge. Movement of the ruddervators can alter the movement 
of the aircraft around the horizontal and/or vertical axis. 
Additionally, some aircraft are equipped with flaperons. 
[Figure 1-60] Flaperons are ailerons which can also act as 
flaps. Flaps are secondary control surfaces on most wings, 
discussed in the next section of this chapter.

Secondary or Auxiliary Control Surfaces 
There are several secondary or auxiliary flight control 
surfaces. Their names, locations, and functions of those for 
most large aircraft are listed in Figure 1-61.

Flaps
Flaps are found on most aircraft. They are usually inboard on 
the wings’ trailing edges adjacent to the fuselage. Leading 
edge flaps are also common. They extend forward and down 
from the inboard wing leading edge. The flaps are lowered 
to increase the camber of the wings and provide greater lift 
and control at slow speeds. They enable landing at slower 
speeds and shorten the amount of runway required for takeoff 
and landing. The amount that the flaps extend and the angle 
they form with the wing can be selected from the cockpit. 
Typically, flaps can extend up to 45–50°. Figure 1-62 shows 
various aircraft with flaps in the extended position.

Flaps are usually constructed of materials and with techniques 
used on the other airfoils and control surfaces of a particular 
aircraft. Aluminum skin and structure flaps are the norm on 
light aircraft. Heavy and high-performance aircraft flaps 
may also be aluminum, but the use of composite structures 
is also common. 

There are various kinds of flaps. Plain flaps form the trailing 
edge of the wing when the flap is in the retracted position. 
[Figure 1-63A] The airflow over the wing continues over the 
upper and lower surfaces of the flap, making the trailing edge 


1-29

Secondary/Auxiliary Flight Control Surfaces

Name

Flaps

Trim tabs

Balance tabs

Anti-balance tabs

Servo tabs

Spoilers

Slats

Slots

Leading edge flap

Inboard trailing edge of wings

Trailing edge of primary 
flight control surfaces 

Trailing edge of primary 
flight control surfaces

Trailing edge of primary 
flight control surfaces

Trailing edge of primary 
flight control surfaces 

Upper and/or trailing edge of wing

Mid to outboard leading edge of wing

Outer leading edge of wing 
forward of ailerons

Inboard leading edge of wing

Extends the camber of the wing for greater lift and slower flight. 
Allows control at low speeds for short field takeoffs and landings.

Reduces the force needed to move a primary control surface.

Reduces the force needed to move a primary control surface.

Increases feel and effectiveness of primary control surface.

Assists or provides the force for moving a primary flight control.

Decreases (spoils) lift. Can augment aileron function.

Extends the camber of the wing for greater lift and slower flight. 
Allows control at low speeds for short field takeoffs and landings.

Directs air over upper surface of wing during high angle of attack. 
Lowers stall speed and provides control during slow flight. 

Extends the camber of the wing for greater lift and slower flight. 
Allows control at low speeds for short field takeoffs and landings.

Location Function

NOTE: An aircraft may possess none, one, or a combination of the above control surfaces.

Fowler flap

Plain flap Split flap

A B

C

Figure 1-63. Various types of flaps.

Figure 1-62. Various aircraft with flaps in the extended position.

Figure 1-61. Secondary or auxiliary control surfaces and respective locations for larger aircraft. 


1-30

Flap retracted
Flap extended

Actuator

Hinge point

Retractable nose

Fore flap

Mid flap

Aft flap

Retracted

Figure 1-64. Triple-slotted flap. 

Figure 1-65. Leading edge flaps. 

of the flap essentially the trailing edge of the wing. The plain  
flap is hinged so that the trailing edge can be lowered. This 
increases wing camber and provides greater lift. 

A split flap is normally housed under the trailing edge of the 
wing. [Figure 1-63B] It is usually just a braced flat metal 
plate hinged at several places along its leading edge. The 
upper surface of the wing extends to the trailing edge of the 
flap. When deployed, the split flap trailing edge lowers away 
from the trailing edge of the wing. Airflow over the top of the 
wing remains the same. Airflow under the wing now follows 
the camber created by the lowered split flap, increasing lift.

Fowler flaps not only lower the trailing edge of the wing when 
deployed but also slide aft, effectively increasing the area of the 
wing. [Figure 1-63C] This creates more lift via the increased 
surface area, as well as the wing camber. When stowed, the 
fowler flap typically retracts up under the wing trailing edge 
similar to a split flap. The sliding motion of a fowler flap can 
be accomplished with a worm drive and flap tracks.

An enhanced version of the fowler flap is a set of flaps 
that actually contains more than one aerodynamic surface. 
Figure 1-64 shows a triple-slotted flap. In this configuration, 
the flap consists of a fore flap, a mid flap, and an aft flap. 
When deployed, each flap section slides aft on tracks as it 
lowers. The flap sections also separate leaving an open slot 
between the wing and the fore flap, as well as between each 
of the flap sections. Air from the underside of the wing flows 
through these slots. The result is that the laminar flow on the 
upper surfaces is enhanced. The greater camber and effective 
wing area increase overall lift.

Heavy aircraft often have leading edge flaps that are used 
in conjunction with the trailing edge flaps. [Figure 1-65] 
They can be made of machined magnesium or can have an 
aluminum or composite structure. While they are not installed 
or operate independently, their use with trailing edge flaps 
can greatly increase wing camber and lift. When stowed, 
leading edge flaps retract into the leading edge of the wing.

The differing designs of leading edge flaps essentially 
provide the same effect. Activation of the trailing edge 
flaps automatically deploys the leading edge flaps, which 
are driven out of the leading edge and downward, extending 
the camber of the wing. Figure 1-66 shows a Krueger flap, 
recognizable by its flat mid-section.

Slats 
Another leading edge device which extends wing camber is 
a slat. Slats can be operated independently of the flaps with 
their own switch in the cockpit. Slats not only extend out 
of the leading edge of the wing increasing camber and lift, 
but most often, when fully deployed leave a slot between 
their trailing edges and the leading edge of the wing. 
[Figure 1-67] This increases the angle of attack at which 
the wing will maintain its laminar airflow, resulting in the 
ability to fly the aircraft slower with a reduced stall speed, 
and still maintain control. 

Spoilers and Speed Brakes
A spoiler is a device found on the upper surface of many 
heavy and high-performance aircraft. It is stowed flush to 
the wing’s upper surface. When deployed, it raises up into 
the airstream and disrupts the laminar airflow of the wing, 
thus reducing lift. 

Spoilers are made with similar construction materials and 
techniques as the other flight control surfaces on the aircraft. 
Often, they are honeycomb-core flat panels. At low speeds, 
spoilers are rigged to operate when the ailerons operate to 
assist with the lateral movement and stability of the aircraft. 
On the wing where the aileron is moved up, the spoilers 
also raise thus amplifying the reduction of lift on that wing. 
[Figure 1-68] On the wing with downward aileron deflection, 


1-31

Figure 1-66. Side view (left) and front view (right) of a Krueger flap on a Boeing 737. 

Figure 1-67. Air passing through the slot aft of the slat promotes 
boundary layer airflow on the upper surface at high angles of attack. 

Figure 1-68. Spoilers deployed upon landing on a transport category 
aircraft. 

the spoilers remain stowed. As the speed of the aircraft  
increases, the ailerons become more effective and the spoiler 
interconnect disengages.

Spoilers are unique in that they may also be fully deployed 
on both wings to act as speed brakes. The reduced lift and 
increased drag can quickly reduce the speed of the aircraft in 
flight. Dedicated speed brake panels similar to flight spoilers 
in construction can also be found on the upper surface of 
the wings of heavy and high-performance aircraft. They are 
designed specifically to increase drag and reduce the speed 
of the aircraft when deployed. These speed brake panels 
do not operate differentially with the ailerons at low speed.  

The speed brake control in the cockpit can deploy all spoiler 
and speed brake surfaces fully when operated. Often, these 
surfaces are also rigged to deploy on the ground automatically 
when engine thrust reversers are activated. 

Tabs 
The force of the air against a control surface during the high 
speed of flight can make it difficult to move and hold that 
control surface in the deflected position. A control surface 
might also be too sensitive for similar reasons. Several different 
tabs are used to aid with these types of problems. The table 
in Figure 1-69 summarizes the various tabs and their uses. 


1-32

Ground adjustable rudder trim

Flight Control Tabs

Type ActivationDirection of Motion
(in relation to control surface)

Effect

Trim

Balance

Servo

Spring

Opposite

Opposite

Opposite

Same

Opposite

Set by pilot from cockpit.
Uses independent linkage.

Moves when pilot moves control surface. 
Coupled to control surface linkage.

Directly linked to flight control
input device. Can be primary
or back-up means of control.

Directly linked to flight 
control input device. 

Located in line of direct linkage to servo
tab. Spring assists when control forces 
become too high in high-speed flight.

Statically balances the aircraft
in flight. Allows “hands off”

maintenance of flight condition. 

Aids pilot in overcoming the force 
needed to move the control surface.  

Aerodynamically positions control
surfaces that require too much 

force to move manually.

Increases force needed by pilot
to change flight control position. 

De-sensitizes flight controls.

Enables moving control surface 
when forces are high. 

Inactive during slow flight.

Anti-balance 
or Anti-servo 

Figure 1-69. Various tabs and their uses.

Figure 1-70. Example of a trim tab. 

While in flight, it is desirable for the pilot to be able to take his 
or her hands and feet off of the controls and have the aircraft 
maintain its flight condition. Trims tabs are designed to allow 
this. Most trim tabs are small movable surfaces located on 
the trailing edge of a primary flight control surface. A small 
movement of the tab in the direction opposite of the direction 
the flight control surface is deflected, causing air to strike the 
tab, in turn producing a force that aids in maintaining the flight 
control surface in the desired position. Through linkage set 
from the cockpit, the tab can be positioned so that it is actually 
holding the control surface in position rather than the pilot. 
Therefore, elevator tabs are used to maintain the speed of the 
aircraft since they assist in maintaining the selected pitch. 
Rudder tabs can be set to hold yaw in check and maintain 
heading. Aileron tabs can help keep the wings level.

Occasionally, a simple light aircraft may have a stationary 
metal plate attached to the trailing edge of a primary flight 
control, usually the rudder. This is also a trim tab as shown in 
Figure 1-70. It can be bent slightly on the ground to trim the 
aircraft in flight to a hands-off condition when flying straight 
and level. The correct amount of bend can be determined only 
by flying the aircraft after an adjustment. Note that a small 
amount of bending is usually sufficient.

The aerodynamic phenomenon of moving a trim tab in one 
direction to cause the control surface to experience a force 
moving in the opposite direction is exactly what occurs with 
the use of balance tabs. [Figure 1-71] Often, it is difficult to 
move a primary control surface due to its surface area and 
the speed of the air rushing over it. Deflecting a balance tab 
hinged at the trailing edge of the control surface in the opposite 

direction of the desired control surface movement causes 
a force to position the surface in the proper direction with 
reduced force to do so. Balance tabs are usually linked directly 
to the control surface linkage so that they move automatically 
when there is an input for control surface movement. They 
also can double as trim tabs, if adjustable in the flight deck.

A servo tab is similar to a balance tab in location and effect, 
but it is designed to operate the primary flight control surface, 
not just reduce the force needed to do so. It is usually used as 
a means to back up the primary control of the flight control 
surfaces. [Figure 1-72]


1-33

Fixed surface Control

Tab geared to deflect proportionally to the 
control deflection, but in the opposite direction

Tab

Lift

Free link

Control surface hinge line

Control stick

Free link

Spring

Control stick

Hinge
Vent gap Control tabBalance panel

AILERON

WING

Vent gap
Lower pressure

Figure 1-71. Balance tabs assist with forces needed to position 
control surfaces. 

Figure 1-72. Servo tabs can be used to position flight control 
surfaces in case of hydraulic failure.

Figure 1-73. Many tab linkages have a spring tab that kicks in as 
the forces needed to deflect a control increase with speed and the 
angle of desired deflection.

Figure 1-74. An aileron balance panel and linkage uses varying air pressure to assist in control surface positioning. 

On heavy aircraft, large control surfaces require too much 
force to be moved manually and are usually deflected out 
of the neutral position by hydraulic actuators. These power 
control units are signaled via a system of hydraulic valves 
connected to the yoke and rudder pedals. On fly-by-wire 
aircraft, the hydraulic actuators that move the flight control 

surfaces are signaled by electric input. In the case of hydraulic 
system failure(s), manual linkage to a servo tab can be used 
to deflect it. This, in turn, provides an aerodynamic force 
that moves the primary control surface. 

A control surface may require excessive force to move only 
in the final stages of travel. When this is the case, a spring 
tab can be used. This is essentially a servo tab that does not 
activate until an effort is made to move the control surface 
beyond a certain point. When reached, a spring in line of the 
control linkage aids in moving the control surface through 
the remainder of its travel. [Figure 1-73]

Figure 1-74 shows another way of assisting the movement of 
an aileron on a large aircraft. It is called an aileron balance 
panel. Not visible when approaching the aircraft, it is 
positioned in the linkage that hinges the aileron to the wing. 

Balance panels have been constructed typically of aluminum 
skin-covered frame assemblies or aluminum honeycomb 
structures. The trailing edge of the wing just forward of the 
leading edge of the aileron is sealed to allow controlled airflow 
in and out of the hinge area where the balance panel is located.  


1-34

Antiservo tab

Stabilator pivot point

Balance panel

Figure 1-75. The trailing edge of the wing just forward of the leading 
edge of the aileron is sealed to allow controlled airflow in and out 
of the hinge area where the balance panel is located. 

Figure 1-76. An antiservo tab moves in the same direction as the 
control tab. Shown here on a stabilator, it desensitizes the pitch 
control. 

Figure 1-77. A winglet reduces aerodynamic drag caused by air 
spilling off of the wing tip. 

[Figure 1-75] When the aileron is moved from the neutral 
position, differential pressure builds up on one side of the 
balance panel. This differential pressure acts on the balance 
panel in a direction that assists the aileron movement. For 
slight movements, deflecting the control tab at the trailing 
edge of the aileron is easy enough to not require significant 
assistance from the balance tab. (Moving the control tab moves 
the ailerons as desired.) But, as greater deflection is requested, 
the force resisting control tab and aileron movement becomes 
greater and augmentation from the balance tab is needed. The 
seals and mounting geometry allow the differential pressure 
of airflow on the balance panel to increase as deflection of 
the ailerons is increased. This makes the resistance felt when 
moving the aileron controls relatively constant.

Antiservo tabs, as the name suggests, are like servo tabs but 
move in the same direction as the primary control surface. 
On some aircraft, especially those with a movable horizontal 
stabilizer, the input to the control surface can be too sensitive. 
An antiservo tab tied through the control linkage creates an 
aerodynamic force that increases the effort needed to move 
the control surface. This makes flying the aircraft more 
stable for the pilot. Figure 1-76 shows an antiservo tab in 
the near neutral position. Deflected in the same direction as 
the desired stabilator movement, it increases the required 
control surface input.

Other Wing Features
There may be other structures visible on the wings of an 
aircraft that contribute to performance. Winglets, vortex 
generators, stall fences, and gap seals are all common wing 
features. Introductory descriptions of each are given in the 
following paragraphs. 

A winglet is an obvious vertical upturn of the wing’s tip 
resembling a vertical stabilizer. It is an aerodynamic device 
designed to reduce the drag created by wing tip vortices in 
flight. Usually made from aluminum or composite materials, 
winglets can be designed to optimize performance at a desired 
speed. [Figure 1-77]

Vortex generators are small airfoil sections usually attached 
to the upper surface of a wing. [Figure 1-78] They are 
designed to promote positive laminar airflow over the 
wing and control surfaces. Usually made of aluminum and 
installed in a spanwise line or lines, the vortices created by 
these devices swirl downward assisting maintenance of the 
boundary layer of air flowing over the wing. They can also 
be found on the fuselage and empennage. Figure 1-79 shows 
the unique vortex generators on a Symphony SA-160 wing.

A chordwise barrier on the upper surface of the wing, called 
a stall fence, is used to halt the spanwise flow of air. During 
low speed flight, this can maintain proper chordwise airflow 
reducing the tendency for the wing to stall. Usually made 
of aluminum, the fence is a fixed structure most common 
on swept wings, which have a natural spanwise tending 
boundary air flow. [Figure 1-80]


1-35

Aileron gap seal

Tab gap seal

Stall fence

Figure 1-78. Vortex generators. 

Figure 1-79. The Symphony SA-160 has two unique vortex 
generators on its wing to ensure aileron effectiveness through the 
stall. 

Figure 1-80. A stall fence aids in maintaining chordwise airflow 
over the wing. 

Figure 1-81. Gap seals promote the smooth flow of air over gaps between fixed and movable surfaces. 

Often, a gap can exist between the stationary trailing edge 
of a wing or stabilizer and the movable control surface(s). 
At high angles of attack, high pressure air from the lower 
wing surface can be disrupted at this gap. The result can 
be turbulent airflow, which increases drag. There is also a 
tendency for some lower wing boundary air to enter the gap 

and disrupt the upper wing surface airflow, which in turn 
reduces lift and control surface responsiveness. The use of 
gap seals is common to promote smooth airflow in these gap 
areas. Gap seals can be made of a wide variety of materials 
ranging from aluminum and impregnated fabric to foam 
and plastic. Figure 1-81 shows some gap seals installed on 
various aircraft.

Landing Gear
The landing gear supports the aircraft during landing and 
while it is on the ground. Simple aircraft that fly at low speeds 
generally have fixed gear. This means the gear is stationary 
and does not retract for flight. Faster, more complex aircraft 
have retractable landing gear. After takeoff, the landing 
gear is retracted into the fuselage or wings and out of the 
airstream. This is important because extended gear create 
significant parasite drag which reduces performance. Parasite 
drag is caused by the friction of the air flowing over the 


1-36

Figure 1-83. Aircraft landing gear without wheels.

Figure 1-82. Landing gear can be fixed (top) or retractable (bottom). 

gear. It increases with speed. On very light, slow aircraft, the  
extra weight that accompanies a retractable landing gear is 
more of a detriment than the drag caused by the fixed gear. 
Lightweight fairings and wheel pants can be used to keep 
drag to a minimum. Figure 1-82 shows examples of fixed 
and retractable gear. 

Landing gear must be strong enough to withstand the forces 
of landing when the aircraft is fully loaded. In addition to 
strength, a major design goal is to have the gear assembly be 
as light as possible. To accomplish this, landing gear are made 
from a wide range of materials including steel, aluminum, 
and magnesium. Wheels and tires are designed specifically 
for aviation use and have unique operating characteristics. 
Main wheel assemblies usually have a braking system. To 
aid with the potentially high impact of landing, most landing 
gear have a means of either absorbing shock or accepting 
shock and distributing it so that the structure is not damaged. 

Not all aircraft landing gear are configured with wheels. 
Helicopters, for example, have such high maneuverability 
and low landing speeds that a set of fixed skids is common 
and quite functional with lower maintenance. The same is true 
for free balloons which fly slowly and land on wood skids 
affixed to the floor of the gondola. Other aircraft landing gear 
are equipped with pontoons or floats for operation on water. 
A large amount of drag accompanies this type of gear, but an 
aircraft that can land and take off on water can be very useful 
in certain environments. Even skis can be found under some 
aircraft for operation on snow and ice. Figure 1-83 shows 
some of these alternative landing gear, the majority of which 
are the fixed gear type.

Amphibious aircraft are aircraft than can land either on land 
or on water. On some aircraft designed for such dual usage, 
the bottom half of the fuselage acts as a hull. Usually, it is 
accompanied by outriggers on the underside of the wings 
near the tips to aid in water landing and taxi. Main gear that 


1-37

Figure 1-85. Retractable wheels make this aircraft amphibious.

Figure 1-84. An amphibious aircraft is sometimes called a flying 
boat because the fuselage doubles as a hull. 

Figure 1-86. An aircraft with tail wheel gear.

retract into the fuselage are only extended when landing on 
the ground or a runway. This type of amphibious aircraft is 
sometimes called a flying boat. [Figure 1-84]

Many aircraft originally designed for land use can be fitted 
with floats with retractable wheels for amphibious use. 
[Figure 1-85] Typically, the gear retracts into the float 
when not needed. Sometimes a dorsal fin is added to the aft 
underside of the fuselage for longitudinal stability during 
water operations. It is even possible on some aircraft to direct 
this type of fin by tying its control into the aircraft’s rudder 
pedals. Skis can also be fitted with wheels that retract to allow 
landing on solid ground or on snow and ice.

Tail Wheel Gear Configuration
There are two basic configurations of airplane landing gear: 
conventional gear or tail wheel gear and the tricycle gear. 
Tail wheel gear dominated early aviation and therefore 
has become known as conventional gear. In addition to its 
two main wheels which are positioned under most of the 
weight of the aircraft, the conventional gear aircraft also 
has a smaller wheel located at the aft end of the fuselage. 

[Figure 1-86] Often this tail wheel is able to be steered 
by rigging cables attached to the rudder pedals. Other 
conventional gear have no tail wheel at all using just a steel 
skid plate under the aft fuselage instead. The small tail wheel 
or skid plate allows the fuselage to incline, thus giving 
clearance for the long propellers that prevailed in aviation 
through WWII. It also gives greater clearance between the 
propeller and loose debris when operating on an unpaved 
runway. But the inclined fuselage blocks the straight-ahead 
vision of the pilot during ground operations. Until up to speed 
where the elevator becomes effective to lift the tail wheel off 
the ground, the pilot must lean his head out the side of the 
cockpit to see directly ahead of the aircraft. 

The use of tail wheel gear can pose another difficulty. When 
landing, tail wheel aircraft can easily ground loop. A ground 
loop is when the tail of the aircraft swings around and comes 
forward of the nose of the aircraft. The reason this happens 
is due to the two main wheels being forward of the aircraft’s 
center of gravity. The tail wheel is aft of the center of gravity. 
If the aircraft swerves upon landing, the tail wheel can swing 
out to the side of the intended path of travel. If far enough 
to the side, the tail can pull the center of gravity out from its 
desired location slightly aft of but between the main gear. 
Once the center of gravity is no longer trailing the mains, 
the tail of the aircraft freely pivots around the main wheels 
causing the ground loop. 

Conventional gear is useful and is still found on certain models 
of aircraft manufactured today, particularly aerobatic aircraft, 
crop dusters, and aircraft designed for unpaved runway use. 
It is typically lighter than tricycle gear which requires a stout, 
fully shock absorbing nose wheel assembly. The tail wheel 
configuration excels when operating out of unpaved runways. 
With the two strong main gear forward providing stability 
and directional control during takeoff roll, the lightweight tail 
wheel does little more than keep the aft end of the fuselage 
from striking the ground. As mentioned, at a certain speed, 


1-38

Figure 1-87. Tricycle landing gear is the most predominant landing gear configuration in aviation. 

the air flowing over the elevator is sufficient for it to raise the 
tail off the ground. As speed increases further, the two main 
wheels under the center of gravity are very stable. 

Tricycle Gear Configuration
Tricycle gear is the most prevalent landing gear configuration 
in aviation. In addition to the main wheels, a shock absorbing 
nose wheel is at the forward end of the fuselage. Thus, the 
center of gravity is then forward of the main wheels. The tail 
of the aircraft is suspended off the ground and clear view 
straight ahead from the cockpit is given. Ground looping 
is nearly eliminated since the center of gravity follows the 
directional nose wheel and remains between the mains.

Light aircraft use tricycle gear, as well as heavy aircraft. Twin 
nose wheels on the single forward strut and massive multistrut/
multiwheel main gear may be found supporting the world’s 
largest aircraft, but the basic configuration is still tricycle. 
The nose wheel may be steered with the rudder pedals on 
small aircraft. Larger aircraft often have a nose wheel steering 
wheel located off to the side of the cockpit. Figure 1-87 shows 
aircraft with tricycle gear. Chapter 13, Aircraft Landing Gear 
Systems, discusses landing gear in detail.

Maintaining the Aircraft
Maintenance of an aircraft is of the utmost importance 
for safe flight. Certificated technicians are committed to 
perform timely maintenance functions in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions and under Title 14 of the Code of 
Federal Regulations (14 CFR). At no time is an act of aircraft 
maintenance taken lightly or improvised. The consequences 
of such action could be fatal, and the technician could lose 
his or her certificate and face criminal charges.

Airframe, engine, and aircraft component manufacturers are 
responsible for documenting the maintenance procedures that 
guide managers and technicians on when and how to perform 
maintenance on their products. A small aircraft may only 

require a few manuals, including the aircraft maintenance 
manual. This volume usually contains the most frequently 
used information required to maintain the aircraft properly. 
The Type Certificate Data Sheet (TCDS) for an aircraft also 
contains critical information. Complex and large aircraft 
require several manuals to convey correct maintenance 
procedures adequately. In addition to the maintenance 
manual, manufacturers may produce such volumes as 
structural repair manuals, overhaul manuals, wiring diagram 
manuals, component manuals, and more. 

Note that the use of the word “manual” is meant to include 
electronic as well as printed information. Also, proper 
maintenance extends to the use of designated tools and 
fixtures called out in the manufacturer’s maintenance 
documents. In the past, not using the proper tooling has 
caused damage to critical components, which subsequently 
failed and led to aircraft crashes and the loss of human 
life. The technician is responsible for sourcing the correct 
information, procedures, and tools needed to perform 
airworthy maintenance or repairs.

Standard aircraft maintenance procedures do exist and can 
be used by the technician when performing maintenance or a 
repair. These are found in the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) approved advisory circulars (AC) 43.13-2 and AC 
43.13-1. If not addressed by the manufacturer’s literature, 
the technician may use the procedures outlined in these 
manuals to complete the work in an acceptable manner. These 
procedures are not specific to any aircraft or component 
and typically cover methods used during maintenance of all 
aircraft. Note that the manufacturer’s instructions supersede 
the general procedures found in AC 43.13-2 and AC 43.13-1.

All maintenance related actions on an aircraft or component 
are required to be documented by the performing technician 
in the aircraft or component logbook. Light aircraft may have 
only one logbook for all work performed. Some aircraft may 


1-39

FS −97.0
FS −85.20

FS −80.00
FS −59.06

FS −48.50
FS −31.00

FS −16.25
FS 0.00

FS 20.20
FS 37.50

FS 58.75
FS 69.203 FS 89.25

FS 109.375
FS 132.00

FS 154.75
FS 177.50

FS 189.10
FS 200.70

FS 214.00
FS 224.00

FS 234.00
FS 273.52

WL 0.00

Figure 1-88. The various fuselage stations relative to a single point of origin illustrated in inches or some other measurement (if of 
foreign development).

have a separate engine logbook for any work performed on 
the engine(s). Other aircraft have separate propeller logbooks.
Large aircraft require volumes of maintenance documentation 
comprised of thousands of procedures performed by hundreds 
of technicians. Electronic dispatch and recordkeeping of 
maintenance performed on large aircraft such as airliners 
is common. The importance of correct maintenance 
recordkeeping should not be overlooked.

Location Numbering Systems
Even on small, light aircraft, a method of precisely locating 
each structural component is required. Various numbering 
systems are used to facilitate the location of specific wing 
frames, fuselage bulkheads, or any other structural members 
on an aircraft. Most manufacturers use some system of 
station marking. For example, the nose of the air craft may be 
designated “zero station,” and all other stations are located at 
measured distances in inches behind the zero station. Thus, 
when a blueprint reads “fuselage frame station 137,” that 
particular frame station can be located 137 inches behind 
the nose of the aircraft.

To locate structures to the right or left of the center line of an 
aircraft, a similar method is employed. Many manufacturers 
con sider the center line of the aircraft to be a zero station 
from which measurements can be taken to the right or left 
to locate an airframe member. This is often used on the 
horizontal stabilizer and wings. 
 
The applicable manufacturer’s numbering system and 
abbreviated designations or symbols should al ways be 
reviewed before attempting to locate a structural member. 
They are not always the same. The following list includes 
loca tion designations typical of those used by many 
manufacturers.

• Fuselage stations (Fus. Sta. or FS) are numbered in 
inches from a reference or zero point known as the 

reference datum. [Figure 1-88] The reference datum 
is an imaginary ver tical plane at or near the nose of 
the aircraft from which all fore and aft dis tances are 
measured. The distance to a given point is measured 
in inches paral lel to a center line extending through 
the aircraft from the nose through the center of the 
tail cone. Some manufacturers may call the fuselage 
station a body sta tion, abbreviated BS. 

• Buttock line or butt line (BL) is a vertical reference 
plane down the center of the aircraft from which 
measurements left or right can be made. [Figure 1-89]

• Water line (WL) is the measurement of height in 
inches perpendicular from a horizontal plane usually 
located at the ground, cabin floor, or some other easily 
referenced location. [Figure 1-90]

 • Aileron station (AS) is measured out board from, 
and parallel to, the inboard edge of the aileron, 
perpendicular to the rear beam of the wing. 

• Flap station (KS) is measured perpendicular to the rear 
beam of the wing and parallel to, and outboard from, 
the in board edge of the flap. 

• Nacelle station (NC or Nac. Sta.) is measured either 
forward of or behind the front spar of the wing and 
perpendic ular to a designated water line. 

In addition to the location stations listed above, other 
measurements are used, especially on large aircraft. Thus, 
there may be horizontal stabilizer stations (HSS), vertical 
stabilizer stations (VSS) or powerplant stations (PPS). 
[Figure 1-91] In every case, the manufacturer’s terminology 
and station lo cation system should be consulted before 
locating a point on a particular aircraft.

Another method is used to facilitate the location of aircraft 
components on air transport aircraft. This involves dividing 
the aircraft into zones. These large areas or major zones 


1-40

BL 21.50

BL 47.50

BL 21.50

BL 47.50

BL 96.50BL 96.50

BL 16.00
BL 23.25

BL 34.5
BL 47.27

BL 61.50
BL 76.50

B
L
 8

6
.5

6

B
L
 9

6
.6

2

BL 34.5
BL 47.27

BL 61.50
BL 76.50

B
L
 8

6
.5

6

B
L
 9

6
.6

2

WL 123.483

WL 73.5WL 79.5

WL 97.5

WL 7.55 WL 9.55Ground line

Figure 1-89. Butt line diagram of a horizontal stabilizer. 

Figure 1-90. Water line diagram. 

are further divided into sequentially numbered zones and 
subzones. The digits of the zone number are reserved and  
indexed to indicate the location and type of system of which 
the component is a part. Figure 1-92 illustrates these zones 
and subzones on a transport category aircraft. 

Access and Inspection Panels
Knowing where a particular structure or component is located 
on an aircraft needs to be combined with gaining access to 
that area to perform the required inspections or maintenance. 
To facilitate this, access and inspection panels are located on 
most surfaces of the aircraft. Small panels that are hinged or 
removable allow inspection and servicing. Large panels and 
doors allow components to be removed and installed, as well 
as human entry for maintenance purposes. 

The underside of a wing, for example, sometimes contains 
dozens of small panels through which control cable 
components can be monitored and fittings greased. Various 
drains and jack points may also be on the underside of 

the wing. The upper surface of the wings typically have 
fewer access panels because a smooth surface promotes 
better laminar airflow, which causes lift. On large aircraft, 
walkways are sometimes designated on the wing upper 
surface to permit safe navigation by mechanics and inspectors 
to critical structures and components located along the 
wing’s leading and trailing edges. Wheel wells and special 
component bays are places where numerous components and 
accessories are grouped together for easy maintenance access. 

Panels and doors on aircraft are numbered for positive 
identification. On large aircraft, panels are usually numbered 
sequentially containing zone and subzone information in the 
panel number. Designation for a left or right side location on 
the aircraft is often indicated in the panel number. This could 
be with an “L” or “R,” or panels on one side of the aircraft 
could be odd numbered and the other side even numbered. 
The manufacturer’s maintenance manual explains the panel 
numbering system and often has numerous diagrams and 
tables showing the location of various components and under 
which panel they may be found. Each manufacturer is entitled 
to develop its own panel numbering system.

Helicopter Structures
The structures of the helicopter are designed to give the 
helicopter its unique flight characteristics. A simplified 
explanation of how a helicopter flies is that the rotors are 
rotating airfoils that provide lift similar to the way wings 
provide lift on a fixed-wing aircraft. Air flows faster over the 
curved upper surface of the rotors, causing a negative pressure 
and thus, lifting the aircraft. Changing the angle of attack of 
the rotating blades increases or decreases lift, respectively 
raising or lowering the helicopter. Tilting the rotor plane of 
rotation causes the aircraft to move horizontally. Figure 1-93 
shows the major components of a typical helicopter.

Airframe
The airframe, or fundamental structure, of a helicopter can be 
made of either metal or wood composite materials, or some 


1-41

WGLTS 49.89

WGLTS 0.00

3
5
3

3
7
1

15°

F
S

 6
2
5
.3

0

F
S

 6
7
4
.7

3
7

F
S

 6
5
2
.2

6
4

1
0
0
.7

2

1
3
5
.8

4
5

1
5
1
.1

4

1
7
7

1
8
5

2
0
0

1
5
5
.3

1
5

2
1
8
.1

7
2
3
0
.1

3
1

2°

NAC CL

BL 86.179

FUS CL

 C FUS-WING STA 0L

3
7
9

4
1
1

4
3
7

5
1
1
.2

1

5
3
6

5
6
8
.5

5
8
5

6
5
2
.2

6
4

8
4
3
.8

8
6
3

8
8
6

9
0
3

9
4
3

16.5
15.2 25.7

41.3
56.9
72.5
88.1

104.1
111

122

177.0

2°

NAC CL
BL 86.179

65.7
76.5

85.5

106.4

127.2

148
163

178

199

220

242
258
264

274
282
294.5

315.5
329.5

343.5
353

371
4°

Zones

Subzones

ZONE 300—Empennage

351
321

322 323
325

324326

311

312

ZONE 300—Empennage

331
332

333

334
335

341 342
343

344
345

ZONE 800—Doors

822

824
825

823

821
811

ZONE 100—Lower half of fuselage

111 112

123

122

121

134
135

133
132

131

143
142

141

144
146

145

Zone 500—Left wing 

Zone 700—Landing gear and landing gear doors

Zone 200—Upper half of fuselage 

Zone 400—Engine nacelles 

Zone 600—Right wing 

Figure 1-91. Wing stations are often referenced off the butt line, which bisects the center of the fuselage longitudinally. Horizontal 
stabilizer stations referenced to the butt line and engine nacelle stations are also shown. 

Figure 1-92. Large aircraft are divided into zones and subzones for identifying the location of various components.


1-42

Main rotor hub assembly

Main rotor blades

Fuselage

Landing gear or skid

Transmission

Powerplant

Airframe

Tail skid

Tail rotor

Tail boom

Stabilizer

Pylon

Figure 1-93. The major components of a helicopter are the airframe, fuselage, landing gear, powerplant/transmission, main rotor system, 
and antitorque system. 

combination of the two. Typically, a composite component 
consists of many layers of fiber-impregnated resins, bonded 
to form a smooth panel. Tubular and sheet metal substructures 
are usually made of aluminum, though stainless steel or 
titanium are sometimes used in areas subject to higher 
stress or heat. Airframe design encompasses engineering, 
aerodynamics, materials technology, and manufacturing 
methods to achieve favorable balances of performance, 
reliability, and cost.

Fuselage
As with fixed-wing aircraft, helicopter fuselages and tail 
booms are often truss-type or semimonocoque structures 
of stress-skin design. Steel and aluminum tubing, formed 
aluminum, and aluminum skin are commonly used. Modern 
helicopter fuselage design includes an increasing utilization 
of advanced composites as well. Firewalls and engine 
decks are usually stainless steel. Helicopter fuselages vary 
widely from those with a truss frame, two seats, no doors, 
and a monocoque shell flight compartment to those with 
fully enclosed airplane-style cabins as found on larger 
twin-engine helicopters. The multidirectional nature of 
helicopter flight makes wide-range visibility from the 
cockpit essential. Large, formed polycarbonate, glass, or 
plexiglass windscreens are common.

Landing Gear or Skids
As mentioned, a helicopter’s landing gear can be simply a 
set of tubular metal skids. Many helicopters do have landing 
gear with wheels, some retractable.  

Powerplant and Transmission
The two most common types of engine used in helicopters are 
the reciprocating engine and the turbine engine. Reciprocating 
engines, also called piston engines, are generally used 
in smaller helicopters. Most training helicopters use 
reciprocating engines because they are relatively simple 
and inexpensive to operate. Refer to the Pilot’s Handbook 
of Aeronautical Knowledge for a detailed explanation and 
illustrations of the piston engine.

Turbine Engines
Turbine engines are more powerful and are used in a wide 
variety of helicopters. They produce a tremendous amount 
of power for their size but are generally more expensive 
to operate. The turbine engine used in helicopters operates 
differently than those used in airplane applications. In most 
applications, the exhaust outlets simply release expended 
gases and do not contribute to the forward motion of the 
helicopter. Because the airflow is not a straight line pass 
through as in jet engines and is not used for propulsion, the  


1-43

Output Shaft

Air inlet

Compression Section Turbine Section Combustion Section
Gearbox
Section

Inlet air
Compressor discharge air
Combustion gases
Exhaust gases

Combustion liner

Exhaust air outlet

Compressor rotor

Fuel nozzle

Igniter plug

N1 RotorN2 Rotor Stator

Gear

Figure 1-94. Many helicopters use a turboshaft engine to drive the main transmission and rotor systems. The main difference between 
a turboshaft and a turbojet engine is that most of the energy produced by the expanding gases is used to drive a turbine rather than 
producing thrust through the expulsion of exhaust gases.

cooling effect of the air is limited. Approximately 75 percent 
of the incoming airflow is used to cool the engine.

The gas turbine engine mounted on most helicopters is 
made up of a compressor, combustion chamber, turbine, 
and accessory gearbox assembly. The compressor draws 
filtered air into the plenum chamber and compresses it. 
Common type filters are centrifugal swirl tubes where debris 
is ejected outward and blown overboard prior to entering 
the compressor, or engine barrier filters (EBF), a paper 
element type filter, encased in a frame with a screen/grill 
over the inlet, and usually coated with an oil. This design 
significantly reduces the ingestion of foreign object debris 
(FOD). The compressed air is directed to the combustion 
section through discharge tubes where atomized fuel is 
injected into it. The fuel/air mixture is ignited and allowed 
to expand. This combustion gas is then forced through a 
series of turbine wheels causing them to turn. These turbine 
wheels provide power to both the engine compressor and the 
accessory gearbox. Depending on model and manufacturer, 
the rpm range can vary from a range low of 20,000 to a range 
high of 51,600.

Power is provided to the main rotor and tail rotor systems 
through the freewheeling unit which is attached to the 
accessory gearbox power output gear shaft. The combustion 
gas is finally expelled through an exhaust outlet. The 
temperature of gas is measured at different locations and is 
referenced differently by each manufacturer. Some common 
terms are: inter-turbine temperature (ITT), exhaust gas 
temperature (EGT), or turbine outlet temperature (TOT). 

TOT is used throughout this discussion for simplicity 
purposes. [Figure 1-94]

Transmission
The transmission system transfers power from the engine to 
the main rotor, tail rotor, and other accessories during normal 
flight conditions. The main components of the transmission 
system are the main rotor transmission, tail rotor drive 
system, clutch, and freewheeling unit. The freewheeling unit, 
or autorotative clutch, allows the main rotor transmission to 
drive the tail rotor drive shaft during autorotation. Helicopter 
transmissions are normally lubricated and cooled with their 
own oil supply. A sight gauge is provided to check the oil 
level. Some transmissions have chip detectors located in the 
sump. These detectors are wired to warning lights located 
on the pilot’s instrument panel that illuminate in the event 
of an internal problem. Some chip detectors on modern 
helicopters have a “burn off” capability and attempt to correct 
the situation without pilot action. If the problem cannot be 
corrected on its own, the pilot must refer to the emergency 
procedures for that particular helicopter. 

Main Rotor System
The rotor system is the rotating part of a helicopter which 
generates lift. The rotor consists of a mast, hub, and rotor 
blades. The mast is a cylindrical metal shaft that extends 
upwards from and is driven, and sometimes supported, by 
the transmission. At the top of the mast is the attachment 
point for the rotor blades called the hub. The rotor blades are 
then attached to the hub by any number of different methods. 
Main rotor systems are classified according to how the main 


1-44

Main rotor hub
Blade pitch horns

Pitch change links

Main rotor blades

Main rotor blades

Main rotor mast

Blade gripBlade grip

Blade pitch
change horn

Pitch link

Coning hinge Teetering hinge

Swash plate

Coning hinge

Figure 1-95. Four-blade hingeless (rigid) main rotor. The hub is a single piece of forged rigid titanium.

Figure 1-96. The semirigid rotor system of the Robinson R22.

rotor blades are attached and move relative to the main rotor 
hub. There are three basic classifications: rigid, semirigid, 
or fully articulated. 

Rigid Rotor System
The simplest is the rigid rotor system. In this system, the 
rotor blades are rigidly attached to the main rotor hub and 
are not free to slide back and forth (drag) or move up and 
down (flap). [Figure 1-95] The forces tending to make the 
rotor blades do so are absorbed by the flexible properties of 
the blade. The pitch of the blades, however, can be adjusted 
by rotation about the spanwise axis via the feathering hinges. 
 
Semirigid Rotor System
The semirigid rotor system in Figure 1-96 makes use of a 
teetering hinge at the blade attach point. While held in check 
from sliding back and forth, the teetering hinge does allow 
the blades to flap up and down. With this hinge, when one 
blade flaps up, the other flaps down.

Flapping is caused by a phenomenon known as dissymmetry 
of lift. As the plane of rotation of the rotor blades is tilted and 
the helicopter begins to move forward, an advancing blade 
and a retreating blade become established (on two-bladed 
systems). The relative windspeed is greater on an advancing 
blade than it is on a retreating blade. This causes greater lift 
to be developed on the advancing blade, causing it to rise 

up or flap. When blade rotation reaches the point where the 
blade becomes the retreating blade, the extra lift is lost and 
the blade flaps downward. [Figure 1-97]

Fully Articulated Rotor System
Fully articulated rotor blade systems provide hinges that 
allow the rotors to move fore and aft, as well as up and 


1-45

 Blade
 ro

tat
ion

   
  B

la

de
 ro

tation

R
e
la

tiv
e
 w

in
d

Forward Flight 100 knots

R
e
la

tiv
e
 w

in
d

Direction of Flight

Advancing SideRetreating Side

Blade tip
speed 
plus
helicopter
speed
(400 knots)

Blade tip
speed 
minus
helicopter
speed
(200 knots)

Pitch horn

Drag hingeFlap hinge

Damper

Pitch change axis (feathering)

Figure 1-97. The blade tip speed of this helicopter is approximately 
300 knots. If the helicopter is moving forward at 100 knots, the 
relative windspeed on the advancing side is 400 knots. On the 
retreating side, it is only 200 knots. This difference in speed causes 
a dissymetry of lift.

Figure 1-98. Fully articulated rotor system.

Figure 1-99. Five-blade articulated main rotor with elastomeric 
bearings. 

down. This lead-lag, drag, or hunting movement as it is 
called is in response to the Coriolis effect during rotational 
speed changes. When first starting to spin, the blades lag 
until centrifugal force is fully developed. Once rotating, a 
reduction in speed causes the blades to lead the main rotor 
hub until forces come into balance. Constant fluctuations in 
rotor blade speeds cause the blades to “hunt.” They are free 
to do so in a fully articulating system due to being mounted 
on the vertical drag hinge. 

One or more horizontal hinges provide for flapping on a 
fully articulated rotor system. Also, the feathering hinge 
allows blade pitch changes by permitting rotation about the 
spanwise axis. Various dampers and stops can be found on 
different designs to reduce shock and limit travel in certain 
directions. Figure 1-98 shows a fully articulated main rotor 
system with the features discussed. 

Numerous designs and variations on the three types of main 
rotor systems exist. Engineers continually search for ways to 
reduce vibration and noise caused by the rotating parts of the 
helicopter. Toward that end, the use of elastomeric bearings 
in main rotor systems is increasing. These polymer bearings 
have the ability to deform and return to their original shape. 
As such, they can absorb vibration that would normally be 
transferred by steel bearings. They also do not require regular 
lubrication, which reduces maintenance.

Some modern helicopter main rotors have been designed 
with flextures. These are hubs and hub components that are 
made out of advanced composite materials. They are designed 
to take up the forces of blade hunting and dissymmetry of 

lift by flexing. As such, many hinges and bearings can be 
eliminated from the traditional main rotor system. The result 
is a simpler rotor mast with lower maintenance due to fewer 
moving parts. Often designs using flextures incorporate 
elastomeric bearings. [Figure 1-99]

Antitorque System
Ordinarily, helicopters have between two and seven main 
rotor blades. These rotors are usually made of a composite 
structure. The large rotating mass of the main rotor blades 
of a helicopter produce torque. This torque increases with 
engine power and tries to spin the fuselage in the opposite 
direction. The tail boom and tail rotor, or antitorque rotor, 
counteract this torque effect. [Figure 1-100] Controlled 
with foot pedals, the countertorque of the tail rotor must be 


1-46

Air jet

Downwash

Lift

Air intake
Rotating nozzle

Main rotor wake

Figure 1-101. A Fenestron or “fan-in-tail” antitorque system. 
This design provides an improved margin of safety during ground 
operations. 

Figure 1-102. While in a hover, Coanda Effect supplies 
approximately two-thirds of the lift necessary to maintain directional 
control. The rest is created by directing the thrust from the 
controllable rotating nozzle.

  B
lad

e rota
tion

 Blade rota
tion

Tail rotor thrust
Resultant

torque from
main rotor

blades

Torque

Torq
ue

Figure 1-100. A tail rotor is designed to produce thrust in a direction 
opposite to that of the torque produced by the rotation of the main 
rotor blades. It is sometimes called an antitorque rotor. 

modulated as engine power levels are changed. This is done 
by changing the pitch of the tail rotor blades. This, in turn, 
changes the amount of countertorque, and the aircraft can be 
rotated about its vertical axis, allowing the pilot to control 
the direction the helicopter is facing.

Similar to a vertical stabilizer on the empennage of an 
airplane, a fin or pylon is also a common feature on rotorcraft. 
Normally, it supports the tail rotor assembly, although 
some tail rotors are mounted on the tail cone of the boom. 
Additionally, a horizontal member called a stabilizer is often 
constructed at the tail cone or on the pylon. 

A Fenestron® is a unique tail rotor design which is actually a 
multiblade ducted fan mounted in the vertical pylon. It works 
the same way as an ordinary tail rotor, providing sideways 
thrust to counter the torque produced by the main rotors. 
[Figure 1-101] 

A NOTAR® antitorque system has no visible rotor mounted 
on the tail boom. Instead, an engine-driven adjustable fan 
is located inside the tail boom. NOTAR® is an acronym 
that stands for “no tail rotor.” As the speed of the main 
rotor changes, the speed of the NOTAR® fan changes. Air 
is vented out of two long slots on the right side of the tail 
boom, entraining main rotor wash to hug the right side of the 
tail boom, in turn causing laminar flow and a low pressure 
(Coanda Effect). This low pressure causes a force counter 
to the torque produced by the main rotor. Additionally, the 
remainder of the air from the fan is sent through the tail 
boom to a vent on the aft left side of the boom where it is 
expelled. This action to the left causes an opposite reaction 

to the right, which is the direction needed to counter the main 
rotor torque. [Figures 1-102]

Controls
The controls of a helicopter differ slightly from those found 
in an aircraft. The collective, operated by the pilot with the 
left hand, is pulled up or pushed down to increase or decrease 
the angle of attack on all of the rotor blades simultaneously. 
This increases or decreases lift and moves the aircraft up 
or down. The engine throttle control is located on the hand 
grip at the end of the collective. The cyclic is the control 
“stick” located between the pilot’s legs. It can be moved in 


1-47

Throttle control

Collective

Forward flight

Cyclic control stick moved forward

Sideware flight

Cyclic control stick moved sideways

Swash plate

Figure 1-103. The collective changes the pitch of all of the rotor 
blades simultaneously and by the same amount, thereby increasing 
or decreasing lift.

Figure 1-104. The cyclic changes the angle of the swash plate which 
changes the plane of rotation of the rotor blades. This moves the 
aircraft horizontally in any direction depending on the positioning 
of the cyclic.

any direction to tilt the plane of rotation of the rotor blades. 
This causes the helicopter to move in the direction that the 
cyclic is moved. As stated, the foot pedals control the pitch 
of the tail rotor blades thereby balancing main rotor torque. 
Figures 1-103 and 1-104 illustrate the controls found in a 
typical helicopter.


1-48

