
8-1

Chapter 8

Aircraft Painting and Finishing
Introduction 
Paint, or more specifically its overall color and application, 
is usually the first impression that is transmitted to someone 
when they look at an aircraft for the first time. Paint makes 
a statement about the aircraft and the person who owns or 
operates it. The paint scheme may reflect the owner’s ideas 
and color preferences for an amateur-built aircraft project, 
or it may be colors and identification for the recognition of 
a corporate or air carrier aircraft.


8-2

Paint is more than aesthetics; it affects the weight of the 
aircraft and protects the integrity of the airframe. The 
topcoat finish is applied to protect the exposed surfaces 
from corrosion and deterioration. Also, a properly painted 
aircraft is easier to clean and maintain because the exposed 
surfaces are more resistant to corrosion and dirt, and oil does 
not adhere as readily to the surface.

A wide variety of materials and finishes are used to protect 
and provide the desired appearance of the aircraft. The term 
“paint” is used in a general sense and includes primers, 
enamels, lacquers, and the various multipart finishing 
formulas. Paint has three components: resin as coating 
material, pigment for color, and solvents to reduce the mix 
to a workable viscosity.

Internal structure and unexposed components are finished to 
protect them from corrosion and deterioration. All exposed 
surfaces and components are finished to provide protection 
and to present a pleasing appearance. Decorative finishing 
includes trim striping, the addition of company logos and 
emblems, and the application of decals, identification 
numbers, and letters. 

Finishing Materials 
A wide variety of materials are used in aircraft finishing. 
Some of the more common materials and their uses are 
described in the following paragraphs.

Acetone
Acetone is a fast-evaporating colorless solvent. It is used as 
an ingredient in paint, nail polish, and varnish removers. It 
is a strong solvent for most plastics and is ideal for thinning 
fiberglass resin, polyester resins, vinyl, and adhesives. It is 
also used as a superglue remover. Acetone is a heavy-duty 
degreaser suitable for metal preparation and removing grease 
from fabric covering prior to doping. It should not be used 
as a thinner in dope because of its rapid evaporation, which 
causes the doped area to cool and collect moisture. This 
absorbed moisture prevents uniform drying and results in 
blushing of the dope and a flat no-gloss finish.

Alcohol
Butanol, or butyl alcohol, is a slow-drying solvent that can 
be mixed with aircraft dope to retard drying of the dope film 
on humid days, thus preventing blushing. A mixture of dope 
solvent containing 5 to 10 percent of butyl alcohol is usually 
sufficient for this purpose. Butanol and ethanol alcohol are 
mixed together in ratios ranging from 1:1 to 1:3 to use to 
dilute wash coat primer for spray applications because the 
butyl alcohol retards the evaporation rate.

Ethanol or denatured alcohol is used to thin shellac for 
spraying and as a constituent of paint and varnish remover. It 
can also be used as a cleaner and degreaser prior to painting.

Isopropyl, or rubbing alcohol, can be used as a disinfectant. 
It is used in the formulation of oxygen system cleaning 
solutions. It can be used to remove grease pencil and 
permanent marker from smooth surfaces, or to wipe hand or 
fingerprint oil from a surface before painting. 

Benzene
Benzene is a highly flammable, colorless liquid with a 
sweet odor. It is a product used in some paint and varnish 
removers. It is an industrial solvent that is regulated by 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) because it is 
an extremely toxic chemical compound when inhaled or 
absorbed through the skin. It has been identified as a Class A 
carcinogen known to cause various forms of cancer. It should 
be avoided for use as a common cleaning solvent for paint 
equipment and spray guns.

Methyl Ethyl Ketone (MEK)
Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), also referred to as 2-Butanone, 
is a highly flammable, liquid solvent used in paint and 
varnish removers, paint and primer thinners, in surface 
coatings, adhesives, printing inks, as a catalyst for polyester 
resin hardening, and as an extraction medium for fats, oils, 
waxes, and resins. Because of its effectiveness as a quickly 
evaporating solvent, MEK is used in formulating high 
solids coatings that help to reduce emissions from coating 
operations. Persons using MEK should use protective gloves 
and have adequate ventilation to avoid the possible irritation 
effects of skin contact and breathing of the vapors.

Methylene Chloride
Methylene chloride is a colorless, volatile liquid completely 
miscible with a variety of other solvents. It is widely used in 
paint strippers and as a cleaning agent/degreaser for metal 
parts. It has no flash point under normal use conditions and 
can be used to reduce the flammability of other substances. 

Toluene
Referred to as toluol or methylbenzene, toluene is a clear, 
water-insoluble liquid with a distinct odor similar to that of 
benzene. It is a common solvent used in paints, paint thinners, 
lacquers, and adhesives. It has been used as a paint remover in 
softening fluorescent-finish, clear-topcoat sealing materials. 
It is also an acceptable thinner for zinc chromate primer. It has 
been used as an antiknocking additive in gasoline. Prolonged 
exposure to toluene vapors should be avoided because it may 
be linked to brain damage.


8-3

Turpentine
Turpentine is obtained by distillation of wood from certain 
pine trees. It is a flammable, water-insoluble liquid solvent 
used as a thinner and quick-drier for varnishes, enamels, and 
other oil-based paints. Turpentine can be used to clean paint 
equipment and paint brushes used with oil-based paints. 

Mineral Spirits
Sometimes referred to as white spirit, Stoddard solvent, or 
petroleum spirits, mineral spirits is a petroleum distillate used 
as a paint thinner and mild solvent. The reference to the name 
Stoddard came from a dry cleaner who helped to develop it 
in the 1920s as a less volatile dry cleaning solvent and as an 
alternative to the more volatile petroleum solvents that were 
being used for cleaning clothes. It is the most widely used 
solvent in the paint industry, used in aerosols, paints, wood 
preservatives, lacquers, and varnishes. It is also commonly 
used to clean paint brushes and paint equipment. Mineral 
spirits are used in industry for cleaning and degreasing 
machine tools and parts because it is very effective in 
removing oils and greases from metal. It has low odor, is 
less flammable, and less toxic than turpentine. 

Naphtha
Naphtha is one of a wide variety of volatile hydrocarbon 
mixtures that is sometimes processed from coal tar but more 
often derived from petroleum. Naphtha is used as a solvent 
for various organic substances, such as fats and rubber, and 
in the making of varnish. It is used as a cleaning fluid and 
is incorporated into some laundry soaps. Naphtha has a 
low flashpoint and is used as a fuel in portable stoves and 
lanterns. It is sold under different names around the world and 
is known as white gas, or Coleman fuel, in North America. 

Linseed Oil
Linseed oil is the most commonly used carrier in oil paint. It 
makes the paint more fluid, transparent, and glossy. It is used 
to reduce semipaste oil colors, such as dull black stenciling 
paint and insignia colors, to a brushing consistency. Linseed 
oil is also used as a protective coating on the interior of metal 
tubing. Linseed oil is derived from pressing the dried ripe 
flax seeds of the flax plant to obtain the oil and then using a 
process called solvent extraction. Oil obtained without the 
solvent extraction process is marketed as flaxseed oil. The 
term “boiled linseed oil” indicates that it was processed with 
additives to shorten its drying time. 

A note of caution is usually added to packaging of linseed 
oil with the statement, “Risk of Fire from Spontaneous 
Combustion Exists with this Product.” Linseed oil generates 
heat as it dries. Oily materials and rags must be properly 
disposed after use to eliminate the possible cause of 
spontaneous ignition and fire.

Thinners
Thinners include a plethora of solvents used to reduce the 
viscosity of any one of the numerous types of primers, 
subcoats, and topcoats. The types of thinner used with the 
various coatings is addressed in other sections of this chapter. 

Varnish
Varnish is a transparent protective finish primarily used 
for finishing wood. It is available in interior and exterior 
grades. The exterior grade does not dry as hard as the 
interior grade, allowing it to expand and contract with the 
temperature changes of the material being finished. Varnish 
is traditionally a combination of a drying oil, a resin, and a 
thinner or solvent. It has little or no color, is transparent, and 
has no added pigment. Varnish dries slower than most other 
finishes. Resin varnishes dry and harden when the solvents 
in them evaporate. Polyurethane and epoxy varnishes remain 
liquid after the evaporation of the solvent but quickly begin to 
cure through chemical reactions of the varnish components.

Primers
The importance of primers in finishing and protection is 
generally misunderstood and underestimated because it is 
invisible after the topcoat finish is applied. A primer is the 
foundation of the finish. Its role is to bond to the surface, inhibit 
corrosion of metal, and provide an anchor point for the finish 
coats. It is important that the primer pigments be either anodic 
to the metal surface or passivate the surface should moisture be 
present. The binder must be compatible with the finish coats. 
Primers on nonmetallic surfaces do not require sacrificial or 
passivating pigments. Some of the various primer types are  
discussed below. 

Wash Primers
Wash primers are water-thin coatings of phosphoric acid in 
solutions of vinyl butyral resin, alcohol, and other ingredients. 
They are very low in solids with almost no filling qualities. 
Their functions are to passivate the surface, temporarily 
provide corrosion resistance, and provide an adhesive base 
for the next coating, such as a urethane or epoxy primer. 
Wash primers do not require sanding and have high-corrosion 
protection qualities. Some have a very small recoat time 
frame that must be considered when painting larger aircraft. 
The manufacturers’ instructions must be followed for 
satisfactory results.  

Red Iron Oxide
Red oxide primer is an alkyd resin-based coating that 
was developed for use over iron and steel located in mild 
environmental conditions. It can be applied over rust that is 
free of loose particles, oil, and grease. It has limited use in 
the aviation industry. 


8-4

Gray Enamel Undercoat
This is a single component, nonsanding primer compatible 
with a wide variety of topcoats. It fills minor imperfections, 
dries fast without shrinkage, and has high-corrosion 
resistance. It is a good primer for composite substrates.

Urethane 
This is a term that is misused or interchanged by painters 
and manufacturers alike. It is typically a two-part product 
that uses a chemical activator to cure by linking molecules 
together to form a whole new compound. Polyurethane is 
commonly used when referring to urethane, but not when 
the product being referred to is acrylic urethane. 

Urethane primer, like the urethane paint, is also a two-part 
product that uses a chemical activator to cure. It is easy 
to sand and fills well. The proper film thickness must be 
observed, because it can shrink when applied too heavily. It is 
typically applied over a wash primer for best results. Special 
precautions must be taken by persons spraying because 
the activators contain isocyanates (discussed further in the 
Protective Equipment section at the end of this chapter).

Epoxy
Epoxy is a synthetic, thermosetting resin that produces 
tough, hard, chemical-resistant coatings and adhesives. It 
uses a catalyst to chemically activate the product, but it is not 
classified as hazardous because it contains no isocyanates. 
Epoxy can be used as a nonsanding primer/sealer over bare 
metal and it is softer than urethane, so it has good chip 
resistance. It is recommended for use on steel tube frame 
aircraft prior to installing fabric covering. 

Zinc Chromate
Zinc chromate is a corrosion-resistant pigment that can 
be added to primers made of different resin types, such as 
epoxy, polyurethane, and alkyd. Older type zinc chromate 
is distinguishable by its bright yellow color when compared 
to the light green color of some of the current brand primers. 
Moisture in the air causes the zinc chromate to react with 
the metal surface, and it forms a passive layer that prevents 
corrosion. Zinc chromate primer was, at one time, the 
standard primer for aircraft painting. Environmental concerns 
and new formula primers have all but replaced it. 

Identification of Paints
Dope
When fabric-covered aircraft ruled the sky, dope was the 
standard finish used to protect and color the fabric. The dope 
imparted additional qualities of increased tensile strength, 
airtightness, weather-proofing, ultraviolet (UV) protection, 
and tautness to the fabric cover. Aircraft dope is essentially 

a colloidal solution of cellulose acetate or nitrate combined 
with plasticizers to produce a smooth, flexible, homogeneous 
film. 

Dope is still used on fabric covered aircraft as part of a 
covering process. However, the type of fabric being used 
to cover the aircraft has changed. Grade A cotton or linen 
was the standard covering used for years, and it still may 
be used if it meets the requirements of the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA), Technical Standard Order (TSO) 
C-15d/AMS 3806c. 

Polyester fabric coverings now dominate in the aviation 
industry. These new fabrics have been specifically 
developed for aircraft and are far superior to cotton and 
linen. The protective coating and topcoat finishes used 
with the Ceconite® polyester fabric covering materials are 
part of a Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) and must 
be used as specified when covering any aircraft with a 
Standard Airworthiness Certificate. The Ceconite® covering 
procedures use specific brand name, nontautening nitrate and 
butyrate dope as part of the STC.
 
The Poly-Fiber® system also uses a special polyester fabric 
covering as part of its STC, but it does not use dope. All the 
liquid products in the Poly-Fiber® system are made from 
vinyl, not from cellulose dope. The vinyl coatings have 
several real advantages over dope: they remain flexible, they 
do not shrink, they do not support combustion, and they are 
easily removed from the fabric with MEK, which simplifies 
most repairs. 
 
Synthetic Enamel
Synthetic enamel is an oil-based, single-stage paint (no clear 
coat) that provides durability and protection. It can be mixed 
with a hardener to increase the durability and shine while 
decreasing the drying time. It is one of the more economical 
types of finish.

Lacquers
The origin of lacquer dates back thousands of years to a resin 
obtained from trees indigenous to China. In the early 1920s, 
nitrocellulose lacquer was developed from a process using 
cotton and wood pulp. 

Nitrocellulose lacquers produce a hard, semiflexible finish 
that can be polished to a high sheen. The clear variety yellows 
as it ages, and it can shrink over time to a point that the surface 
crazes. It is easy to spot repair because each new coat of 
lacquer softens and blends into the previous coat. This was 
one of the first coatings used by the automotive industry in 
mass production, because it reduced finishing times from 
almost two weeks to two days. 


8-5

Acrylic lacquers were developed to eliminate the yellowing 
problems and crazing of the nitrocellulose lacquers. General 
Motors started using acrylic lacquer in the mid-1950s, and 
they used it into the 1960s on some of their premium model 
cars. Acrylics have the same working properties but dry to a 
less brittle and more flexible film than nitrocellulose lacquer. 

Lacquer is one of the easiest paints to spray, because it dries 
quickly and can be applied in thin coats. However, lacquer 
is not very durable; bird droppings, acid rain, and gasoline 
spills actually eat down into the paint. It still has limited use 
on collector and show automobiles because they are usually 
kept in a garage, protected from the environment. 

The current use of lacquer for an exterior coating on an 
aircraft is almost nonexistent because of durability and 
environmental concerns. Upwards of 85 percent of the 
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the spray gun ends 
up in the atmosphere, and some states have banned its use. 

There are some newly developed lacquers that use a catalyst, 
but they are used mostly in the woodworking and furniture 
industry. They have the ease of application of nitrocellulose 
lacquer with much better water, chemical, and abrasion 
resistance. Additionally, catalyzed lacquers cure chemically, 
not solely through the evaporation of solvents, so there is 
a reduction of VOCs released into the atmosphere. It is 
activated when the catalyst is added to the base mixture. 

Polyurethane
Polyurethane is at the top of the list when compared to 
other coatings for abrasion-, stain-, and chemical-resistant 
properties. Polyurethane was the coating that introduced 
the wet look. It has a high degree of natural resistance to the 
damaging effects of UV rays from the sun. Polyurethane is 
usually the first choice for coating and finishing the corporate 
and commercial aircraft in today’s aviation environment.

Urethane Coating
The term urethane applies to certain types of binders used 
for paints and clear coatings. (A binder is the component that 
holds the pigment together in a tough, continuous film and 
provides film integrity and adhesion.) Typically, urethane is 
a two-part coating that consists of a base and catalyst that, 
when mixed, produces a durable, high-gloss finish that is 
abrasion- and chemical-resistant. 

Acrylic Urethanes
Acrylic simply means plastic. It dries to a harder surface but 
is not as resistant to harsh chemicals as polyurethane. Most 
acrylic urethanes need additional UV inhibitors added when 
subject to the UV rays of the sun.   

Methods of Applying Finish
There are several methods of applying aircraft finish. Among 
the most common are dipping, brushing, and spraying.

Dipping
The application of finishes by dipping is generally confined 
to factories or large repair stations. The process consists of 
dipping the part to be finished in a tank filled with the finishing 
material. Primer coats are frequently applied in this manner.

Brushing
Brushing has long been a satisfactory method of applying 
finishes to all types of surfaces. Brushing is generally used for 
small repair work and on surfaces where it is not practicable 
to spray paint. 

The material to be applied should be thinned to the proper 
consistency for brushing. A material that is too thick has a 
tendency to pull or rope under the brush. If the materials 
are too thin, they are likely to run or not cover the surface 
adequately. Proper thinning and substrate temperature allows 
the finish to flow-out and eliminates the brush marks.

Spraying
Spraying is the preferred method for a quality finish. 
Spraying is used to cover large surfaces with a uniform 
layer of material, which results in the most cost effective 
method of application. All spray systems have several basic 
similarities. There must be an adequate source of compressed 
air, a reservoir or feed tank to hold a supply of the finishing 
material, and a device for controlling the combination of the 
air and finishing material ejected in an atomized cloud or 
spray against the surface to be coated.

A self-contained, pressurized spray can of paint meets the 
above requirements and satisfactory results can be obtained 
painting components and small areas of touchup. However, 
the aviation coating materials available in cans is limited, and 
this chapter addresses the application of mixed components 
through a spray gun. 

There are two main types of spray equipment. A spray gun 
with an integral paint container is adequate for use when 
painting small areas. When large areas are painted, pressure-
feed equipment is more desirable since a large supply of 
finishing material can be applied without the interruption 
of having to stop and refill a paint container. An added 
bonus is the lighter overall weight of the spray gun and 
the flexibility of spraying in any direction with a constant 
pressure to the gun.


8-6

Figure 8-1. Standard air compressor.

The air supply to the spray gun must be entirely free of water 
or oil in order to produce the optimum results in the finished 
product. Water traps, as well as suitable filters to remove any 
trace of oil, must be incorporated in the air pressure supply 
line. These filters and traps must be serviced on a regular basis.

Finishing Equipment
Paint Booth
A paint booth may be a small room in which components 
of an aircraft are painted, or it can be an aircraft hangar big 
enough to house the largest aircraft. Whichever it is, the 
location must be able to protect the components or aircraft 
from the elements. Ideally, it would have temperature and 
humidity controls; but, in all cases, the booth or hangar must 
have good lighting, proper ventilation, and be dust free. 

A simple paint booth can be constructed for a small aircraft 
by making a frame out of wood or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 
pipe. It needs to be large enough to allow room to walk around 
and maneuver the spray gun. The top and sides can be covered 
with plastic sheeting stapled or taped to the frame. An exhaust 
fan can be added to one end with a large air-conditioning 
filter placed on the opposite end to filter incoming air. Lights 
should be large enough to be set up outside of the spray booth 
and shine through the sheeting or plastic windows. The ideal 
amount of light would be enough to produce a glare off of 
all the surfaces to be sprayed. This type of temporary booth 
can be set up in a hangar, a garage, or outside on a ramp, if 
the weather and temperature are favorable.

Normally, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
regulations do not apply to a person painting one airplane. 
However, anyone planning to paint an aircraft should be 
aware that local clean air regulations may be applicable to an 
airplane painting project. When planning to paint an aircraft 
at an airport, it would be a good idea to check with the local 
airport authority before starting. 

Air Supply
The air supply for paint spraying using a conventional siphon 
feed spray gun should come from an air compressor with a 
storage tank big enough to provide an uninterrupted supply 
of air with at least 90 pounds per square inch (psi) providing 
10 cubic feet per minute (CFM) of air to the spray gun. 

The compressor needs to be equipped with a regulator, water 
trap, air hose, and an adequate filter system to ensure that 
clean, dry, oil-free air is delivered to the spray gun. 
 
If using one of the newer high-volume low-pressure (HVLP) 
spray guns and using a conventional compressor, it is better 
to use a two stage compressor of at least a 5 horsepower (hp) 

that operates at 90 psi and provides 20 CFM to the gun. The 
key to the operation of the newer HVLP spray guns is the 
air volume, not the pressure. 

If purchasing a new complete HVLP system, the air supply 
is from a turbine compressor. An HVLP turbine has a series 
of fans, or stages, that move a lot of air at low pressure. 
The more stages provide greater air output (rated in CFM) 
that means better atomization of the coating being sprayed. 
The intake air is also the cooling air for the motor. This air 
is filtered from dirt and dust particles prior to entering the 
turbine. Some turbines also have a second filter for the air 
supply to the spray gun. The turbine does not produce oil 
or water to contaminate the air supply, but the air supply 
from the turbine heats up, causing the paint to dry faster, so 
you may need an additional length of hose to reduce the air 
temperature at the spray gun. 

Spray Equipment
Air Compressors
Piston–type compressors are available with one-stage and 
multiple-stage compressors, various size motors, and various 
size supply tanks. The main requirement for painting is to 
ensure the spray gun has a continuous supplied volume of 
air. Piston-type compressors compress air and deliver it to 
a storage tank. Most compressors provide over 100 psi, but 
only the larger ones provide the volume of air needed for an 
uninterrupted supply to the gun. The multistage compressor 
is a good choice for a shop when a large volume of air is 
needed for pneumatic tools. When in doubt about the size of 
the compressor, compare the manufacturer’s specifications 
and get the largest one possible. [Figure 8-1]


8-7

Figure 8-2. Pressure paint tank.

Figure 8-3. Air line filter assembly.

Large Coating Containers
For large painting projects, such as spraying an entire aircraft, 
the quantity of mixed paint in a pressure tank provides many 
advantages. The setup allows a greater area to be covered 
without having to stop and fill the cup on a spray gun. The 
painter is able to keep a wet paint line, and more material 
is applied to the surface with less overspray. It provides the 
flexibility of maneuvering the spray gun in any position 
without the restriction and weight of an attached paint cup. 
Remote pressure tanks are available in sizes from 2 quarts 
to over 60 gallons. [Figure 8-2]

System Air Filters
The use of a piston-type air compressor for painting requires 
that the air supply lines include filters to remove water and 
oil. A typical filter assembly is shown in Figure 8-3.

Miscellaneous Painting Tools and Equipment
Some tools that are available to the painter include: 

• Masking paper/tape dispenser that accommodates 
various widths of masking paper. It includes a masking 
tape dispenser that applies the tape to one edge of the 
paper as it is rolled off to facilitate one person applying 
the paper and tape in a single step.

• Electronic and magnetic paint thickness gauges to 
measure dry paint thickness.

• Wet film gauges to measure freshly applied wet paint. 

• Infrared thermometers to measure coating and 
substrate surfaces to verify that they fall in the 
recommended temperature range prior to spraying. 

Spray Guns
A top quality spray gun is a key component in producing a 
quality finish in any coating process. It is especially important 
when painting an aircraft because of the large area and varied 
surfaces that must be sprayed. 

When spray painting, it is of utmost importance to follow 
the manufacturer’s recommendations for correct sizing of 
the air cap, fluid tip, and needle combinations. The right 
combination provides the best coverage and the highest 
quality finish in the shortest amount of time.

All of the following examples of the various spray guns 
(except the airless) are of the air atomizing type. They are the 
most capable of providing the highest quality finish. 

Siphon-Feed Gun

The siphon-feed gun is a conventional spray gun familiar to 
most people, with a one quart paint cup located below the gun. 
Regulated air passes through the gun and draws (siphons) 
the paint from the supply cup. This is an external mix gun, 
which means the air and fluid mix outside the air cap. This 
gun applies virtually any type coating and provides a high 
quality finish. [Figure 8-4]

Gravity-Feed Gun

A gravity-feed gun provides the same high-quality finish as 
a siphon-feed gun, but the paint supply is located in a cup 
on top of the gun and supplied by gravity. The operator can 
make fine adjustments between the atomizing pressure and 
fluid flow and utilize all material in the cup. This also is an 
external mix gun. [Figure 8-5]

The HVLP production spray gun is an internal mix gun. The 
air and fluid is mixed inside the air cap. Because of the low 
pressure used in the paint application, it transfers at least 65 


8-8

Figure 8-4. Siphon-feed spray gun. 

Figure 8-5. Gravity-feed spray gun.

Figure 8-6. A high volume low pressure (HVLP) spray gun. 

Figure 8-7. Airless spray gun.

percent and upwards of 80 percent of the finish material to 
the surface. HVLP spray guns are available with a standard 
cup located underneath or in a gravity-feed model with the 
cup on top. The sample shown can be connected with hoses 
to a remote paint material container holding from 2 quarts 
to 60 gallons. [Figure 8-6]

Because of more restrictive EPA regulations, and the fact that 
more paint is being transferred to the surface with less waste 
from overspray, a large segment of the paint and coating 
industry is switching to HVLP spray equipment. 

Airless spraying does not directly use compressed air to 
atomize the coating material. A pump delivers paint to the 
spray gun under high hydraulic pressure (500 to 4,500 psi) to 
atomize the fluid. The fluid is then released through an orifice 
in the spray nozzle. This system increases transfer efficiency 
and production speed with less overspray than conventional 
air atomized spray systems. It is used for production work 
but does not provide the fine finish of air atomized systems. 
[Figure 8-7]


8-9

Figure 8-9. Charcoal-filtered respirator.

Figure 8-10. A Zahn cup viscosity measuring cup.

Figure 8-8. Breathe-Cool II® supplied air respirator system with 
Tyvek® hood.

Fresh Air Breathing Systems
Fresh air breathing systems should be used whenever coatings 
are being sprayed that contain isocyanides. This includes 
all polyurethane coatings. The system incorporates a high-
capacity electric air turbine that provides a constant source of 
fresh air to the mask. The use of fresh air breathing systems 
is also highly recommended when spraying chromate primers 
and chemical stripping aircraft. The system provides cool 
filtered breathing air with up to 200 feet of hose, which allows 
the air pump intake to be placed in an area of fresh air, well 
outside of the spraying area. [Figure 8-8]

A charcoal-filtered respirator should be used for all other 
spraying and sanding operations to protect the lungs and 
respiratory tract. The respirator should be a double-cartridge, 
organic vapor type that provides a tight seal around the nose 
and mouth. The cartridges can be changed separately, and 
should be changed when detecting odor or experiencing nose 
or throat irritation. The outer prefilters should be changed if 
experiencing increased resistance to breathing. [Figure 8-9] 

Viscosity Measuring Cup
This is a small cup with a long handle and a calibrated orifice 
in the bottom that allows the liquid in the cup to drain out 
at a specific timed rate. Coating manufacturers recommend 
spraying their product at a specific pressure and viscosity. 
That viscosity is determined by measuring the efflux (drain) 
time of the liquid coating through the cup orifice. The time 
(in seconds) is listed on most paint manufacturers’ product/
technical data pages. The measurement determines if the 
mixed coating meets the recommended viscosity for spraying. 

There are different manufacturers of the viscosity measuring 
devices, but the most common one listed and used for spray 
painting is known as a Zahn cup. The orifice number must 
correspond to the one listed on the product/technical data 
sheet. For most primers and topcoats, the #2 or #3 Zahn cup 
is the one recommended. [Figure 8-10]

To perform an accurate viscosity measurement, it is very 
important that the temperature of the sample material be 
within the recommended range of 73.5 °F ± 3.5 °F (23 ºC ± 
2 ºC), and then proceed as follows: 

1. Thoroughly mix the sample with minimum bubbles.

2. Dip the Zahn cup vertically into the sample being 
tested, totally immersing the cup below the surface.

3. With a stopwatch in one hand, briskly lift the cup out 
of the sample. As the top edge of the cup breaks the 
surface, start the stopwatch.

4. Stop the stopwatch when the first break in the flow of 
the liquid is observed at the orifice exit. The number 
in seconds is referred to as the efflux time.

5. Record the time on the stopwatch and compare it to 
the coating manufacturer’s recommendation. Adjust 
the viscosity, if necessary, but be aware not to thin 
the coating below recommendations that could result 
in the release of VOCs into the atmosphere above the 
regulated limitations.


8-10

Mixing Equipment
Use a paint shaker for all coatings within 5 days of 
application to ensure the material is thoroughly mixed. Use 
a mechanical paint stirrer to mix larger quantities of material. 
If a mechanical stirrer is driven by a drill, the drill should be 
pneumatic, instead of electric. The sparks from an electric 
drill can cause an explosion from the paint vapors. 

Preparation 
Surfaces
The most important part of any painting project is the 
preparation of the substrate surface. It takes the most work 
and time, but with the surface properly prepared, the results 
are a long-lasting, corrosion-free finish. Repainting an older 
aircraft requires more preparation time than a new paint job 
because of the additional steps required to strip the old paint, 
and then clean the surface and crevices of paint remover. 
Paint stripping is discussed in another section of this chapter. 

It is recommended that all the following procedures be 
performed using protective clothing, rubber gloves, and 
goggles, in a well-ventilated area, at temperatures between 
68 °F and 100 °F. 

Aluminum surfaces are the most common on a typical 
aircraft. The surface should be scrubbed with Scotch-Brite® 
pads using an alkaline aviation cleaner. The work area should 
be kept wet and rinsed with clean water until the surface is 
water break free. This means that there are no beads or breaks 
in the water surface as it flows over the aluminum surface.

The next step is to apply an acid etch solution to the surface. 
Following manufacturers’ suggestions, this is applied like a 
wash using a new sponge and covering a small area while 
keeping it wet and allowing it to contact the surface for between 
1 and 2 minutes. It is then rinsed with clean water without 
allowing the solution to dry on the surface. Continue this 
process until all the aluminum surfaces are washed and rinsed. 
Extra care must be taken to thoroughly rinse this solution from 
all the hidden areas that it may penetrate. It provides a source 
for corrosion to form if not completely removed.

When the surfaces are completely dry from the previous 
process, the next step is to apply Alodine® or another type of 
an aluminum conversion coating. This coating is also applied 
like a wash, allowing the coating to contact the surface and 
keeping it wet for 2 to 5 minutes without letting it dry. It 
then must be thoroughly rinsed with clean water to remove 
all chemical salts from the surface. Depending on the brand, 
the conversion coating may color the aluminum a light gold 
or green, but some brands are colorless. When the surface 
is thoroughly dry, the primer should be applied as soon as 
possible as recommended by the manufacturer.

The primer should be one that is compatible with the topcoat 
finish. Two-part epoxy primers provide excellent corrosion 
resistance and adhesion for most epoxy and urethane surfaces 
and polyurethane topcoats. Zinc chromate should not be used 
under polyurethane paints. 

Composite surfaces that need to be primed may include the 
entire aircraft if it is constructed from those materials, or they 
may only be components of the aircraft, such as fairings, 
radomes, antennas, and the tips of the control surfaces. 

Epoxy sanding primers have been developed that provide 
an excellent base over composites and can be finish 
sanded with 320 grit using a dual action orbital sander. 
They are compatible with two-part epoxy primers and  
polyurethane topcoats.

Topcoats must be applied over primers within the 
recommended time window, or the primer may have to be 
scuff sanded before the finish coat is applied. Always follow 
the recommendations of the coating manufacturer. 

Primer and Paint
Purchase aircraft paint for the aviation painting project. 
Paint manufacturers use different formulas for aircraft and 
automobiles because of the environments they operate in. The 
aviation coatings are formulated to have more flexibility and 
chemical resistance than the automotive paint. 

It is also highly recommended that compatible paints of the 
same brand are used for the entire project. The complete 
system (of a particular brand) from etching to primers and 
reducers to the finish topcoat are formulated to work together. 
Mixing brands is a risk that may ruin the entire project. 

When purchasing the coatings for a project, always request 
a manufacturer’s technical or material data and safety data 
sheets, for each component used. Before starting to spray, 
read the sheets. If the manufacturer’s recommendations are 
not followed, a less than satisfactory finish or a hazard to 
personal safety or the environment may result. It cannot 
be emphasized enough to follow the manufacturer’s 
recommendations. The finished result is well worth the effort.
 
Before primer or paint is used for any type application, it must 
be thoroughly mixed. This is done so that any pigment that 
may have settled to the bottom of the container is brought 
into suspension and distributed evenly throughout the paint. 
Coatings now have shelf lives listed in their specification 
sheets. If a previously opened container is found to have a 
skin or film formed over the primer or paint, the film must 
be completely removed before mixing. The material should 


8-11

0

6

8
10

4
2

Dial at 10
Dial at 8

Dial at 6
Dial at 4

Dial at 2
Dial at 0

Dial

Air valve

Gun body

Locking bolt

Spreader adjustment valve

Fluid needle valve

Figure 8-11. Adjustable spray pattern. 

not be used if it has exceeded its shelf life and/or has become 
thick or jelled. 

Mechanical shaking is recommended for all coatings within 
5  days of use. After opening, a test with a hand stirrer should 
be made to ensure that all the pigment has been brought into 
suspension. Mechanical stirring is recommended for all two-
part coatings. When mixing any two-part paint, the catalyst/
activator should always be added to the base or pigmented 
component. The technical or material data sheet of the coating 
manufacturer should be followed for recommended times of 
induction (the time necessary for the catalyst to react with 
the base prior to application). Some coatings do not require 
any induction time after mixing, and others need 30 minutes 
of reaction time before being applied. 

Thinning of the coating material should follow the 
recommendations of the manufacturer. The degree of 
thinning depends on the method of application. For spray 
application, the type of equipment, air pressure, and 
atmospheric conditions guide the selection and mixing 
ratios for the thinners. Because of the importance of accurate 
thinning to the finished product, use a viscosity measuring 
(flow) cup. Material thinned using this method is the correct 
viscosity for the best application results.

Thin all coating materials and mix in containers separate from 
the paint cup or pot. Then, filter the material through a paint 
strainer recommended for the type coating you are spraying 
as you pour it into the cup or supply pot.

Spray Gun Operation
Adjusting the Spray Pattern
To obtain the correct spray pattern, set the recommended air 
pressure on the gun, usually 40 to 50 psi for a conventional 
gun. Test the pattern of the gun by spraying a piece of 
masking paper taped to the wall. Hold the gun square to the 
wall approximately 8 to 10 inches from the surface. (With 
hand spread, it is the distance from the tip of the thumb to 
the tip of the little finger.) 

All spray guns (regardless of brand name) have the same type 
of adjustments. The upper control knob proportions the air 
flow, adjusting the spray pattern of the gun. [Figure 8-11] 
The lower knob adjusts the fluid passing the needle, which in 
turn controls the amount or volume of paint being delivered 
through the gun.

Pull the trigger lever fully back. Move the gun across the 
paper, and alternately adjust between the two knobs to obtain 
a spray fan of paint that is wet from top to bottom (somewhat 
like the pattern at dial 10.) Turning in (to the right) on the 
lower, or fluid knob, reduces the amount of paint going 
through the gun. Turning out increases the volume of paint. 
Turning out (to the left) on the upper, or pattern control knob, 
widens the spray pattern. Turning in reduces it to a cone shape 
(as shown with dial set at 0).

Once the pattern is set on the gun, the next step is to follow 
the correct spraying technique for applying the coating to 
the surface. 

Applying the Finish
If the painter has never used a spray gun to apply a finish 
coat of paint, and the aircraft has been completely prepared, 
cleaned, primed, and ready for the topcoat, he or she may need 
to pause for some practice. Reading a book or an instruction 
manual is a good start as it provides the basic knowledge 
about the movement of the spray gun across the surface. 
Also, if available, the opportunity to observe an aircraft being 
painted is well worth the time. 

At this point in the project, the aircraft has already received 
its primer coats. The difference between the primer and the 
finish topcoat is that the primer is flat (no gloss) and the 
finish coat has a glossy surface (some more than others, 
depending on the paint). The flat finish of the primer is 
obtained by paying attention to the basics of trigger control 
distance from the surface and consistent speed of movement 
of the spray gun across the surface.


8-12

       
    DO 

NOT ARC STROKE  

8
 t
o

 1
0
 in

ch
e

s

Begin stroke, then pull trigger. Move gun in straight line. Release trigger before
completing stroke.

Arcing causes uneven application

Figure 8-12. Proper spray application.

Primer is typically applied using a crosscoat spray pattern. A 
crosscoat is one pass of the gun from left to right, followed 
by another pass moving up and down. The starting direction 
does not matter as long as the spraying is accomplished in 
two perpendicular passes. The primer should be applied in 
light coats as cross-coating is the application of two coats 
of primer. 

Primer does not tend to run because it is applied in light 
coats. The gloss finish requires a little more experience 
with the gun. A wetter application produces the gloss, but 
the movement of the gun, overlap of the spray pattern, and 
the distance from the surface all affect the final product. It is 
very easy to vary one or another, yielding runs or dry spots 
and a less than desirable finish. Practice not only provides 
some experience, but also provides the confidence needed 
to produce the desired finish. 

Start the practice by spraying the finish coat material on a flat, 
horizontal panel. The spray pattern has been already adjusted 
by testing it on the masking paper taped to the wall. Hold the 
gun 8–10 inches away from and perpendicular to the surface. 
Pull the trigger enough for air to pass through the cap and start 
a pass with the gun moving across the panel. As it reaches 
the point to start painting, squeeze the trigger fully back and 
continue moving the gun about one foot per second across the 
panel until the end is reached. Then, release the trigger enough 
to stop the paint flow but not the air flow. [Figure 8-12]

The constant air flow through the gun maintains a constant 
pressure, rather than a buildup of pressure each time that the 

trigger is released. This would cause a buildup of paint at the 
end of each pass, causing runs and sags in the finish. Repeat 
the sequence of the application, moving back in the opposite 
direction and overlapping the first pass by 50 percent. This 
is accomplished by aiming the center of the spray pattern at 
the outer edge of the first pass and continuing the overlap 
with each successive pass of the gun. 

Once the painter has mastered spraying a flat horizontal panel, 
practice next on a panel that is positioned vertically against a 
wall. This is the panel that shows the value of applying a light 
tack coat before spraying on the second coat. The tack coat 
holds the second coat from sagging and runs. Practice spraying 
this test panel both horizontally with overlapping passes and 
then rotate the air cap 90° on the gun and practice spraying 
vertically with the same 50 percent overlapping passes.
 
Practice cross-coating the paint for an even application. 
Apply two light spray passes horizontally, overlapping each 
by 50 percent, and allowing it to tack. Then, spray vertically 
with overlapping passes, covering the horizontal sprayed 
area. When practice results in a smooth, glossy, no-run 
application on the vertical test panel, you are ready to try 
your skill on the actual project.

Common Spray Gun Problems
A quick check of the spray pattern can be verified before 
using the gun by spraying some thinner or reducer, 
compatible with the finish used, through the gun. It is not of 
the same viscosity as the coating, but it indicates if the gun 
is working properly before the project is started. 


8-13

Figure 8-13. Example of poor adhesion. 

If the gun is not working properly, use the following 
information to troubleshoot the problem: 

• A pulsating, or spitting, fan pattern may be caused by 
a loose nozzle, clogged vent hole on the supply cup, 
or the packing may be leaking around the needle.

• If the spray pattern is offset to one side or the other, 
the air ports in the air cap or the ports in the horns may 
be plugged.

• If the spray pattern is heavy on the top or the bottom, 
rotate the air cap 180°. If the pattern reverses, the air 
cap is the problem. If it stays the same, the fluid tip 
or needle may be damaged.

• Other spray pattern problems may be a result of 
improper air pressure, improper reducing of the 
material, or wrong size spray nozzle. 

Sequence for Painting a Single-Engine or 
Light Twin Airplane
As a general practice on any surface being painted, spray each 
application of coating in a different direction to facilitate even 
and complete coverage. After you apply the primer, apply 
the tack coat and subsequent top coats in opposite directions, 
one coat vertically and the next horizontally, as appropriate. 

Start by spraying all the corners and gaps between the control 
surfaces and fixed surfaces. Paint the leading and trailing 
edges of all surfaces. Spray the landing gear and wheel wells, 
if applicable, and paint the bottom of the fuselage up the sides 
to a horizontal break, such as a seam line. Paint the underside 
of the horizontal stabilizer. Paint the vertical stabilizer and the 
rudder, and then move to the top of the horizontal stabilizer. 
Spray the top and sides of the fuselage down to the point 
of the break from spraying the underside of the fuselage. 
Then, spray the underside of the wings. Complete the job 
by spraying the top of the wings.

The biggest challenge is to control the overspray and keep the 
paint line wet. The ideal scenario would be to have another 
experienced painter with a second spray gun help with the 
painting. It is much easier to keep the paint wet and the job 
is completed in half the time. 
 
Common Paint Troubles
Common problems that may occur during the painting 
of almost any project but are particularly noticeable and 
troublesome on the surfaces of an aircraft include poor 
adhesion, blushing, pinholes, sags and/or runs, “orange peel,” 
fisheyes, sanding scratches, wrinkling, and spray dust. 

Poor Adhesion

• Improper cleaning and preparation of the surface to 
be finished.

• Application of the wrong primer.

• Incompatibility of the topcoat with the primer. 
[Figure 8-13]

• Improper thinning of the coating material or selection 
of the wrong grade reducer.

• Improper mixing of materials. 

• Contamination of the spray equipment and/or air 
supply.

Correction for poor adhesion requires a complete removal of 
the finish, a determination and correction of the cause, and a 
complete refinishing of the affected area.

Blushing
Blushing is the dull milky haze that appears in a paint finish. 
[Figure 8-14] It occurs when moisture is trapped in the paint. 
Blushing forms when the solvents quickly evaporate from the 
sprayed coating, causing a drop in temperature that is enough 
to condense the water in the air. It usually forms when the 
humidity is above 80 percent. Other causes include:

• Incorrect temperature (below 60 °F or above 95 °F). 

• Incorrect reducer (fast drying) being used.

• Excessively high air pressure at the spray gun.

If blushing is noticed during painting, a slow-drying reducer 
can sometimes be added to the paint mixture, and then the 
area resprayed. If blushing is found after the finish has dried, 
the area must be sanded down and repainted. 


8-14

Figure 8-14. Example of blushing. Figure 8-16. Example of sags and runs. 

Figure 8-15. Example of pinholes. Figure 8-17. Example of orange peel.

Pinholes
Pinholes are tiny holes, or groups of holes, that appear in the 
surface of the finish as a result of trapped solvents, air, or 
moisture. [Figure 8-15] Examples include: 

• Contaminants in the paint or air lines. 

• Poor spraying techniques that allow excessively heavy 
or wet paint coats, which tend to trap moisture or 
solvent under the finish. 

• Use of the wrong thinner or reducer, either too fast by 
quick drying the surface and trapping solvents or too 
slow and trapping solvents by subsequent topcoats. 

If pinholes occur during painting, the equipment and painting 
technique must be evaluated before continuing. When dry, 
sand the surface smooth and then repaint. 

Sags and Runs
Sags and runs are usually caused by applying too much paint 
to an area, by holding the spray gun too close to the surface, or 
moving the gun too slowly across the surface. [Figure 8-16] 

Other causes include:

• Too much reducer in the paint (too thin).

• Incorrect spray gun setting of air-paint mixture. 

Sags and runs can be avoided by following the recommended 
thinning instructions for the coatings being applied and taking 
care to use the proper spray gun techniques, especially on 
vertical surfaces and projected edges. Dried sags and runs 
must be sanded out and the surface repainted.

Orange Peel
“Orange peel” refers to the appearance of a bumpy surface, 
much like the skin of an orange. [Figure 8-17] It can be the 
result of a number of factors with the first being the improper 
adjustment of the spray gun. Other causes include:

• Not enough reducer (too thick) or the wrong type 
reducer for the ambient temperature.

• Material not uniformly mixed. 


8-15

Figure 8-18. Example of fisheyes. 

Figure 8-19. Example of sanding scratches.

Figure 8-20. Example of wrinkling.

• Forced drying method, either with fans or heat, is too 
quick.

• Too little flash time between coats.

• Spray painting when the ambient or substrate 
temperature is either too hot or too cold.

Light orange peel can be wet sanded or buffed out with 
polishing compound. In extreme cases, it has to be sanded 
smooth and resprayed.

Fisheyes
Fisheyes appear as small holes in the coating as it is being 
applied, which allows the underlying surface to be seen. 
[Figure 8-18] Usually, it is due to the surface not being 
cleaned of all traces of silicone wax. If numerous fisheyes 
appear when spraying a surface, stop spraying and clean 
off all the wet paint. Then, thoroughly clean the surface to 
remove all traces of silicone with a silicone wax remover. 

The most effective way to eliminate fisheyes is to ensure 
that the surface about to be painted is clean and free from 
any type of contamination. A simple and effective way to 
check this is referred to as a water break test. Using clean 
water, spray, pour, or gently hose down the surface to be 
painted. If the water beads up anywhere on the surface, it is 
not clean. The water should flatten out and cover the area 
with an unbroken film. 

If the occasional fisheye appears when spraying, wait until 
the first coat sets up and then add a recommended amount of 
fisheye eliminator to the subsequent finish coats. Fisheyes may 
appear during touchup of a repair. A coat of sealer may help, 
but completed removal of the finish may be the only solution. 

One last check before spraying is to ensure that the air 
compressor has been drained of water, the regulator cleaned, 
and the system filters are clean or have been replaced so that 
this source of contamination is eliminated. 

Sanding Scratches
Sanding scratches appear in the finish paint when the surface 
has not been properly sanded and/or sealed prior to spraying 
the finish coats. [Figure 8-19] This usually shows up in 
nonmetal surfaces. Composite cowling, wood surfaces, and 
plastic fairings must be properly sanded and sealed before 
painting. The scratches may also appear if on overly rapid 
quick-drying thinner is used.

The only fix after the finish coat has set up is to sand down 
the affected areas using a finer grade of sandpaper, follow 
with a recommended sealer, and then repaint. 

Wrinkling
Wrinkling is usually caused by trapped solvents and unequal 
drying of the paint finish due to excessively thick or solvent-
heavy paint coats. [Figure 8-20] Fast reducers can also 
contribute to wrinkling if the sprayed coat is not allowed to 
dry thoroughly. Thick coatings and quick-drying reducers 


8-16

Figure 8-21. Example of spray dust.

allow the top surface of the coating to dry, trapping the 
solvents underneath. If another heavy coat is applied before 
the first one dries, wrinkles may result. It may also have the 
effect of lifting the coating underneath, almost with the same 
result as a paint stripper. 

Rapid changes in ambient temperatures while spraying may 
cause an uneven release of the solvents, causing the surface 
to dry, shrink, and wrinkle. Making the mistake of using an 
incompatible thinner, or reducer, when mixing the coating 
materials may cause not only wrinkles but other problems 
as well. Wrinkled paint must be completely removed and 
the surface refinished. 

Spray Dust
Spray dust is caused by the atomized spray particles from the 
gun becoming dry before reaching the surface being painted, 
thus failing to flow into a continuous film. [Figure 8-21] This 
may be caused by:

• Incorrect spray gun setting of air pressure, paint flow, 
or spray pattern.

• Spray gun being held too far from the surface. 

• Material being improperly thinned or the wrong 
reducers being used with the finish coats.

The affected area needs to be sanded and recoated.

Painting Trim and Identification Marks
Masking and Applying the Trim
At this point in the project, the entire aircraft has been painted 
with the base color and all the masking paper and tape 
carefully removed. Refer again to the coating manufacturer’s 

technical data sheet for “dry and recoat” times for the 
appropriate temperatures and “dry to tape” time that must 
elapse before safe application and removal of tape on new 
paint without it lifting. 

Masking Materials
When masking for the trim lines, use 3M® Fine Line tape. It 
is solvent proof, available in widths of 1⁄8–1 inch and, when 
applied properly, produces a sharp edge paint line. A good 
quality masking tape should be used with masking paper to 
cover all areas not being trimmed to ensure the paper does not 
lift and allow overspray on the basecoat. Do not use newspaper 
to mask the work as paint penetrates newspaper. Using actual 
masking paper is more efficient, especially if with a masking 
paper/tape dispenser as part of the finishing equipment. 

Masking for the Trim
After the base color has dried and cured for the recommended 
time shown in the manufacturer’s technical data sheet, the 
next step is to mask for the trim. The trim design can be 
simple, with one or two color stripes running along the 
fuselage, or it can be an elaborate scheme covering the entire 
aircraft. Whichever is chosen, the basic masking steps are 
the same. 

If unsure of a design, there are numerous websites that 
provide the information and software to do a professional 
job. If electing to design a personalized paint scheme, the 
proposed design should be portrayed on a silhouette drawing 
of the aircraft as close to scale as possible. It is much easier 
to change a drawing than to remask the aircraft.

Start by identifying a point on the aircraft from which to 
initiate the trim lines using the Fine Line tape. If the lines 
are straight and/or have large radius curves, use ¾-inch or 
one-inch tape and keep it pulled tight. The wider tape is much 
easier to control when masking a straight line. Smaller radius 
curves may require ½-inch or even ¼-inch tape. Try and use 
the widest tape that lays flat and allows for a smooth curve. 
Use a small roller (like those used for wallpaper seams) to 
go back over and roll the tape edges firmly onto the surface 
to ensure they are flat.

Finish masking the trim lines on one side of the aircraft, 
to include the fuselage, vertical fin and rudder, the engine 
nacelles and wing(s). Once complete, examine the lines. If 
adjustments are needed to the placement or design, now is 
the time to correct it. With one side of the aircraft complete, 
the entire design and placement can be transferred to the 
opposite side.

Different methods can be employed to transfer the placement 
of the trim lines from one side of the aircraft to the other. 


8-17

One method is to trace the design on paper and then apply it 
to the other side, starting at the same point opposite the first 
starting point. Another method is to use the initial starting 
point and apply the trim tape using sheet metal or rivet lines 
as reference, along with measurements, to position the tape 
in the correct location. 

When both sides are completed, a picture can be taken of 
each side and a comparison made to verify the tape lines on 
each side of the aircraft are identical.

With the Fine Line taping complete, some painters apply a 
sealing strip of ¾-inch or 1-inch masking tape covering half 
and extending over the outside edge of the Fine Line tape. 
This provides a wider area to apply the masking paper and 
adds an additional seal to the Fine Line tape. Now, apply 
the masking paper using 1-inch tape, placing half the width 
of the tape on the paper and half on the masked trim tape. 

Use only masking paper made for painting and a comparable 
quality masking tape. With all the trim masking complete, 
cover the rest of the exposed areas of the aircraft to prevent 
overspray from landing on the base color. Tape the edges 
of the covering material to ensure the spray does not drift 
under it. 

Now, scuff-sand all the area of trim to be painted to remove 
the gloss of the base paint. The use of 320-grit for the main 
area and a fine mesh Scotch-Brite pad next to the tape line 
should be sufficient. Then, blow all the dust and grit off the 
aircraft, and wipe down the newly sanded trim area with a 
degreaser and a tack cloth. Press or roll down the trim tape 
edges one more time before painting.

There are some various methods used by painters to ensure 
that a sharp defined tape line is attained upon removal of the 
tape. The basic step is to first use the 3M® Fine Line tape 
to mask the trim line. Some painters then spray a light coat 
of the base color or clear coat just prior to spraying the trim 
color. This will seal the tape edge line and ensure a clean 
sharp line when the tape is removed. 

If multiple colors are used for the trim, cover the trim areas 
not to be sprayed with masking paper. When the first color 
is sprayed and dried, remove the masking paper from the 
next trim area to spray and cover the trim area that was first 
sprayed, taking care not to press the masking paper or tape 
into the freshly dried paint. 

With all the trim completed, the masking paper should be 
removed as soon as the last trimmed area is dry to the touch. 
Carefully remove the Fine Line trim edge tape by slowly 
pulling it back onto itself at a sharp angle. Remove all trim 

and masking tape from the base coat as soon as possible to 
preclude damage to the paint. 

As referenced previously, use compatible paint components 
from the same manufacturer when painting trim over the 
base color. This reduces the possibility of an adverse reaction 
between the base coat and the trim colors.    

Display of Nationality and Registration Marks 
The complete regulatory requirement for identification and 
marking of a U.S.-registered aircraft can be found in Title 
14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR), Part 45, 
Identification and Registration Marking. 

In summary, the regulation states that the marks must:

• Be painted on the aircraft or affixed by other means 
to insure a similar degree of permanence;

• Have no ornamentation;

• Contrast in color with the background; and

• Be legible.

The letters and numbers may be taped off and applied at the 
same time and using the same methods as when the trim is 
applied, or they may be applied later as decals of the proper 
size and color.

Display of Marks
Each operator of an aircraft shall display on the aircraft 
marks consisting of the Roman capital letter “N” (denoting 
United States registration) followed by the registration 
number of the aircraft. Each suffix letter must also be a 
Roman capital letter.
  
Location and Placement of Marks
On fixed-wing aircraft, marks must be displayed on either the 
vertical tail surfaces or the sides of the fuselage. If displayed 
on the vertical tail surfaces, they shall be horizontal on both 
surfaces of a single vertical tail or on the outer surfaces of a 
multivertical tail. If displayed on the fuselage surfaces, then 
horizontally on both sides of the fuselage between the trailing 
edge of the wing and the leading edge of the horizontal 
stabilizer. Exceptions to the location and size requirement 
for certain aircraft can be found in 14 CFR part 45. 

On rotorcraft, marks must be displayed horizontally on both 
surfaces of the cabin, fuselage, boom, or tail. On airships, 
balloons, powered parachutes, and weight-shift control 
aircraft, display marks as required by 14 CFR part 45.


8-18

Size Requirements for Different Aircraft
Almost universally for U.S.-registered, standard certificated, 
fixed-wing aircraft, the marks must be at least 12 inches high. 
A glider may display marks at least 3 inches high.

In all cases, the marks must be of equal height, two-thirds 
as wide as they are high, and the characters must be formed 
by solid lines one-sixth as wide as they are high. The letters 
“M” and “W” may be as wide as they are high.

The spacing between each character may not be less than one-
fourth of the character width. The marks required by 14 CFR 
part 45 for fixed-wing aircraft must have the same height, 
width, thickness, and spacing on both sides of the aircraft.

The marks must be painted or, if decalcomanias (decals), 
be affixed in a permanent manner. Other exceptions to the 
size and location of the marks are applicable to aircraft with 
Special Airworthiness certificates and those penetrating 
ADIZ and DEWIZ airspace. The current 14 CFR part 45 
should be consulted for a complete copy of the rules.

Decals
Markings are placed on aircraft surfaces to provide servicing 
instructions, fuel and oil specifications, tank capacities, and 
to identify lifting and leveling points, walkways, battery 
locations, or any areas that should be identified. These 
markings can be applied by stenciling or by using decals.

Decals are used instead of painted instructions because 
they are usually less expensive and easier to apply. Decals 
used on aircraft are usually of three types: paper, metal, or 
vinyl film. These decals are suitable for exterior and interior 
surface application.

To assure proper adhesion of decals, clean all surfaces 
thoroughly with aliphatic naphtha to remove grease, oil, wax, 
or foreign matter. Porous surfaces should be sealed and rough 
surfaces sanded, followed by cleaning to remove any residue.

The instructions to be followed for applying decals are 
usually printed on the reverse side of each decal. A general 
application procedure for each type of decal is presented in 
the following paragraphs to provide familiarization with the 
techniques involved.

Paper Decals
Immerse paper decals in clean water for 1 to 3 minutes. 
Allowing decals to soak longer than 3 minutes causes the 
backing to separate from the decal while immersed. If decals 
are allowed to soak less than 1 minute, the backing does not 
separate from the decal.

Place one edge of the decal on the prepared receiving surface 
and press lightly, then slide the paper backing from beneath the 
decal. Perform any minor alignment with the fingers. Remove 
water by gently blotting the decal and adjacent area with a 
soft, absorbent cloth. Remove air or water bubbles trapped 
under the decal by wiping carefully toward the nearest edge 
of the decal with a cloth. Allow the decal to dry. 

Metal Decals with Cellophane Backing
Apply metal decals with cellophane backing adhesive  
as follows:

1. Immerse the decal in clean, warm water for 1 to 3 
minutes.

2. Remove it from the water and dry carefully with a 
clean cloth.

3. Remove the cellophane backing, but do not touch 
adhesive.

4. Position one edge of the decal on the prepared receiving 
surface. On large foil decals, place the center on the 
receiving surface and work outward from the center 
to the edges.

5. Remove all air pockets by rolling firmly with a rubber 
roller, and press all edges tightly against the receiving 
surface to ensure good adhesion.

Metal Decals With Paper Backing
Metal decals with a paper backing are applied similarly 
to those having a cellophane backing. However, it is not 
necessary to immerse the decal in water to remove the backing. 
It may be peeled from the decal without moistening. Follow 
the manufacturer’s recommendation for activation of the 
adhesive, if necessary, before application. The decal should 
be positioned and smoothed out following the procedures 
given for cellophane-backed decals.

Metal Decals with No Adhesive
Apply decals with no adhesive in the following manner:

1. Apply one coat of cement, Military Specification 
MIL-A-5092, to the decal and prepared receiving 
surface.

2. Allow cement to dry until both surfaces are tacky.

3. Apply the decal and smooth it down to remove air 
pockets.

4. Remove excess adhesive with a cloth dampened with 
aliphatic naphtha.

Vinyl Film Decals
To apply vinyl film decals, separate the paper backing from 
the plastic film. Remove any paper backing adhering to 
the adhesive by rubbing the area gently with a clean cloth 


8-19

saturated with water. Remove small pieces of remaining paper 
with masking tape.

1. Place vinyl film, adhesive side up, on a clean porous 
surface, such as wood or blotter paper.

2. Apply recommended activator to the adhesive in firm, 
even strokes to the adhesive side of decal.

3. Position the decal in the proper location, while 
adhesive is still tacky, with only one edge contacting 
the prepared surface.

4. Work a roller across the decal with overlapping strokes 
until all air bubbles are removed.

Removal of Decals 
Paper decals can be removed by rubbing the decal with a cloth 
dampened with lacquer thinner. If the decals are applied over 
painted or doped surfaces, use lacquer thinner sparingly to 
prevent removing the paint or dope.

Remove metal decals by moistening the edge of the foil with 
aliphatic naphtha and peeling the decal from the adhering 
surface. Work in a well-ventilated area.

Vinyl film decals are removed by placing a cloth saturated 
with MEK on the decal and scraping with a plastic scraper. 
Remove the remaining adhesive by wiping with a cloth 
dampened with a dry-cleaning solvent.

Paint System Compatibility
The use of several different types of paint, coupled with 
several proprietary coatings, makes repair of damaged and 
deteriorated areas particularly difficult. Paint finishes are not 
necessarily compatible  with each other. The following general 
rules for coating compatibility are included for information 
and are not necessarily listed in order of importance:

1. Old type zinc chromate primer may be used directly for 
touchup of bare metal surfaces and for use on interior 
finishes. It may be overcoated with wash primers if it 
is in good condition. Acrylic lacquer finishes do not 
adhere to this material.

2. Modified zinc chromate primer does not adhere 
satisfactorily to bare metal. It must never be used over 
a dried film of acrylic nitrocellulose lacquer.

3. Nitrocellulose coatings adhere to acrylic finishes, but 
the reverse is not true. Acrylic nitrocellulose lacquers 
may not be used over old nitrocellulose finishes.

4. Acrylic nitrocellulose lacquers adhere poorly to bare 
metal and both nitrocellulose and epoxy finishes. For 
best results, the lacquers must be applied over fresh, 
successive coatings of wash primer and modified zinc 
chromate. They also adhere to freshly applied epoxy 
coatings (dried less than 6 hours).

5. Epoxy topcoats adhere to any paint system that is in 
good condition, and may be used for general touchup, 
including touchup of defects in baked enamel coatings.

6. Old wash primer coats may be overcoated directly with 
epoxy finishes. A new second coat of wash primer 
must be applied if an acrylic finish is to be applied.

7. Old acrylic finishes may be refinished with new 
acrylic if the old coating is softened using acrylic 
nitrocellulose thinner before touchup.

8. Damage to epoxy finishes can best be repaired by 
using more epoxy, since neither of the lacquer finishes 
stick to the epoxy surface. In some instances, air-
drying enamels may be used for touchup of epoxy 
coatings if edges of damaged areas are abraded with 
fine sandpaper. 

Paint Touchup
Paint touchup may be required on an aircraft following 
repair to the surface substrate. Touchup may also be used to 
cover minor topcoat damage, such as scratches, abrasions, 
permanent stains, and fading of the trim colors. One of the 
first steps is to identify the paint that needs to be touched up. 

Identification of Paint Finishes
Existing finishes on current aircraft may be any one of several 
types, a combination of two or more types, or combinations 
of general finishes with special proprietary coatings.

Any of the finishes may be present at any given time, and 
repairs may have been made using material from several 
different type coatings. Some detailed information for 
the identification of each finish is necessary to ensure 
the topcoat application does not react adversely with the 
undercoat. A simple test can be used to confirm the nature 
of the coatings present. 

The following procedure aids in identification of the paint 
finish. Apply a coating of engine oil (MIL SPEC, MIL-
PRF-7808, turbine oil, or equivalent) to a small area of the 
surface to be checked. Old nitrocellulose finishes soften 
within a period of a few minutes. Acrylic and epoxy finishes 
show no effects.

If still not identified, wipe a small area of the surface in 
question with a rag wet with MEK. The MEK picks up 
the pigment from an acrylic finish, but has no effect on an 
epoxy coating. Just wipe the surface, and do not rub. Heavy 
rubbing picks up even epoxy pigment from coatings that are 
not thoroughly cured. Do not use MEK on nitrocellulose 
finishes. Figure 8-22 provides a solvent test to identify the 
coating on an aircraft.


8-20

Methanol  S IS IS IS PS IS PS IS IS

   IS IS IS S IS S ISW IS IS

   S S S S ISW S ISW IS IS

   IS IS IS IS IS S IS IS IS

   SS VS S VS ISW S ISW ISW ISW

Butyrate 
dope

Poly-tone
Poly-brush
Poly-spray

Synthetic
enamel

Acrylic
enamel

Nitrate
dope

Nitro- 
cellulose 
lacquer

Acrylic
lacquer

Urethane
enamel

Epoxy
paint

Hitrate

Toluol
(Toluene)

MEK
(Methyl ethyl

ketone)

Isopropanol

Methylene
chloride

IS – Insoluble S – Soluble
ISW – Insoluble, film wrinkles  SS – Slightly Soluble
PS – Penetrate film, slight softening without wrinkling VS – Very Soluble

3–5 Minute Contact With Cotton Wad Saturated With Test Solvent

Figure 8-22. Chart for solvent testing of coating.

Surface Preparation for Touchup
In the case of a repair and touchup, once the aircraft paint 
coating has been identified, the surface preparation follows 
some basic rules.

The first rule, as with the start of any paint project, is to wash 
and wipe down the area with a degreaser and silicone wax 
remover before starting to sand or abrade the area.
  
If a whole panel or section within a seam line can be 
refinished during a touchup, it eliminates having to match 
and blend the topcoat to an existing finish. The area of repair 
should be stripped to a seam line and the finish completely 
redone from wash primer to the topcoat, as applicable. The 
paint along the edge of the stripped area should be hand-
sanded wet and feathered with a 320-grade paper. 

For a spot repair that requires blending of the coating, an area 
about three times the area of the actual repair will need to 
be prepared for blending of the paint. If the damaged area is 
through the primer to the substrate, the repair area should be 
abraded with 320 aluminum oxide paper on a double-action 
(D/A) air sander. Then, the repair and the surrounding area 
should be wet sanded using the air sander fitted with 1500 
wet paper. The area should then be wiped with a tack cloth 
prior to spraying.

Apply a crosscoat of epoxy primer to the bare metal area, 
following the material data sheet for drying and recoat 
times. Abrade the primer area lightly with 1500 wet or dry, 
and then abrade the unsanded area around the repair with 
cutting compound. Clean and wipe the area with a degreasing 
solvent, such as isopropyl alcohol, and then a tack cloth.

Mix the selected topcoat paint that is compatible for the repair. 
Apply two light coats over the sanded repair area, slightly 
extending the second coat beyond the first. Allow time for 
the first coat to flash before applying the second coat. Then, 
thin the topcoat by one-third to one-half with a compatible 
reducer and apply one more coat, extending beyond the first 
two coats. Allow to dry according to the material data sheet 
before buffing and polishing the blended area. 

If the damage did not penetrate the primer, and only the 
topcoat is needed for the finish, complete the same steps that 
would follow a primer coat. 
 
Paint touchup procedures generally are the same for almost 
any repair. The end result, however, is affected by numerous 
variables, which include the preparation, compatibility of the 
finishing materials, color match, selection of reducers and/or 
retarders based on temperature, and experience and expertise 
of the painter.

Stripping the Finish
The most experienced painter, the best finishing equipment, 
and newest coatings, do not produce the desired finish on 
an aircraft if the surface was not properly prepared prior 
to refinishing. Surface preparation for painting of an entire 
aircraft typically starts with the removal of the paint. This 
is done not only for the weight reduction that is gained by 
stripping the many gallons of topcoats and primers, but for the 
opportunity to inspect and repair corrosion or other defects 
uncovered by the removal of the paint. 

Before any chemical stripping can be performed, all areas 
of the aircraft not being stripped must be protected. The 


8-21

stripper manufacturer can recommend protective material 
for this purpose. This normally includes all window material, 
vents and static ports, rubber seals and tires, and composite 
components that may be affected by the chemicals. 

The removal of paint from an aircraft, even a small single-
engine model, involves not only the labor but a concern 
for the environment. You should recognize the impact and 
regulatory requirements that are necessary to dispose of the 
water and coating materials removed from the aircraft.  
  
Chemical Stripping
At one time, most chemical strippers contained methylene 
chloride, considered an environmentally acceptable chemical 
until 1990. It was very effective in removing multiple 
layers of paint. However, in 1990, it was listed as a toxic air 
contaminant that caused cancer and other medical problems 
and was declared a Hazardous Air Pollutant (HAP) by the 
EPA in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990.

Since then, other substitute chemical strippers were tested, 
from formic acid to benzyl alcohol. None of them were found 
to be particularly effective in removing multiple layers of 
paint. Most of them were not friendly to the environment.
 
One of the more recent entries into the chemical stripping 
business is an environmentally friendly product known as 
EFS-2500, which works by breaking the bond between the 
substrate and primer. This leads to a secondary action that 
causes the paint to lift both primer and top coat off the surface 
as a single film. Once the coating is lifted, it is easily removed 
with a squeegee or high-pressure water. 

This product differs from conventional chemical strippers by 
not melting the coatings. Cleanup is easier, and the product 
complies with EPA rules on emissions. Additionally, it 
passed Boeing testing specifications related to sandwich 
corrosion, immersion corrosion, and hydrogen embrittlement. 
EFS-2500 has no chlorinated components, is non-acidic, 
nonflammable, nonhazardous, biodegradable, and has 
minimal to no air pollution potential.

The stripper can be applied using existing common methods, 
such as airless spraying, brushing, rolling, or immersion in a 
tank. It works on all metals, including aluminum, magnesium, 
cadmium plate, titanium, wood, fiberglass, ceramic, concrete, 
plaster, and stone. 

Plastic Media Blasting (PMB)
Plastic media blasting (PMB) is one of the stripping methods 
that reduces and may eliminate a majority of environmental 
pollution problems that can be associated with the earlier 
formulations of some chemical stripping. PMB is a dry 

abrasive blasting process designed to replace chemical paint 
stripping operations. PMB is similar to conventional sand 
blasting except that soft, angular plastic particles are used as 
the blasting medium. The process has minimum effect on the 
surface under the paint because of the plastic medium and 
relatively low air pressure used in the process. The media, 
when processed through a reclamation system, can be reused 
up to 10 times before it becomes too small to effectively 
remove the paint. 

PMB is most effective on metal surfaces, but it has been 
used successfully on composite surfaces after it was found 
to produce less visual damage than removing the paint  
by sanding. 

New Stripping Methods
Various methods and materials for stripping paint and other 
coatings are under development and include:

• A laser stripping process used to remove coatings from 
composites.

• Carbon dioxide pellets (dry ice) used in conjunction 
with a pulsed flashlamp that rapidly heats a thin layer 
of paint, which is then blasted away by the ice pellets.

Safety in the Paint Shop
All paint booths and shops must have adequate ventilation 
systems installed that not only remove the toxic air but, when 
properly operating, reduce and/or eliminate overspray and 
dust from collecting on the finish. All electric motors used in 
the fans and exhaust system should be grounded and enclosed 
to eliminate sparks. The lighting systems and all bulbs should 
be covered and protected against breakage.
 
Proper respirators and fresh air breathing systems must 
be available to all personnel involved in the stripping 
and painting process. When mixing any paint or two-part 
coatings, eye protection and respirators should be worn. 
 
An appropriate number and size of the proper class fire 
extinguishers should be available in the shop or hangar 
during all spraying operations. They should be weighed and 
certified, as required, to ensure they work in the event they 
are needed. Fireproof containers should be available for the 
disposal of all paint and solvent soaked rags.
 
Storage of Finishing Materials
All chemical components that are used to paint an aircraft 
burn in their liquid state. They should be stored away from 
all sources of heat or flames. The ideal place would be in 
fireproof metal cabinets located in a well-ventilated area. 


8-22

Some of the finishing components have a shelf life listed in 
the material or technical data sheet supplied by the coating 
manufacturer. Those materials should be marked on the 
container, with a date of purchase, in the event that they are 
not used immediately. 

Protective Equipment for Personnel
The process of painting, stripping, or refinishing an 
aircraft requires the use of various coatings, chemicals, and 
procedures that may be hazardous if proper precautions are 
not utilized to protect personnel involved in their use.

The most significant hazards are airborne chemicals inhaled 
either from the vapors of opened paint containers or atomized 
mist resulting from spraying applications. There are two 
types of devices available to protect against airborne hazards: 
respirators and forced-air breathing systems. 

A respirator is a device worn over the nose and mouth to 
filter particles and organic vapors from the air being inhaled. 
The most common type incorporate double charcoal-filtered 
cartridges with replaceable dust filters that fits to the face over 
the nose and mouth with a tight seal. When properly used, this 
type of respirator provides protection against the inhalation of 
organic vapors, dust, mists of paints, lacquers, and enamels. 
A respirator does not provide protection against paints and 
coatings containing isocyanates (polyurethane paint). 

A respirator must be used in an area of adequate ventilation. 
If breathing becomes difficult, there is a smell or taste the 
contaminant(s), or an individual becomes dizzy or feel 
nauseous, they should leave the area and seek fresh air 
and assistance as necessary. Carefully read the warnings 
furnished with each respirator describing the limits and 
materials for which they provide protection.

A forced-air breathing system must be used when spraying 
any type of polyurethane or any coating that contains 
isocyanates. It is also recommended for all spraying and 
stripping of any type, whether chemical or media blasting. 
The system provides a constant source of fresh air for 
breathing, which is pumped into the mask through a hose 
from an electric turbine pump. 

Protective clothing, such as Tyvek® coveralls, should be 
worn that not only protects personnel from the paint but also 
help keep dust off the painted surfaces. Rubber gloves must 
be worn when any stripper, etching solution, conversion 
coatings, and solvent is used. 

When solvents are used for cleaning paint equipment and 
spray guns, the area must be free of any open flame or other 
heat source. Solvent should not be randomly sprayed into 
the atmosphere when cleaning the guns. Solvents should not 
be used to wash or clean paint and other coatings from bare 
hands and arms. Use protective gloves and clothing during 
all spraying operations.

In most states, there are Occupational Safety Hazard 
Administration (OSHA) regulations in effect that may require 
personnel to be protected from vapors and other hazards while 
on the job. In any hangar or shop, personnel must be vigilant 
and provide and use protection for safety.
 

