
5-1

Chapter 5

Aircraft Welding
Introduction
Welding can be traced back to the Bronze Age, but it was 
not until the 19th century that welding as we know it today 
was invented. Some of the first successful commercially 
manufactured aircraft were constructed from welded steel 
tube frames. 

As the technology and manufacturing processes evolved 
in the aircraft and aerospace industry, lighter metals, such 
as aluminum, magnesium, and titanium, were used in their 
construction. New processes and methods of welding these 
metals were developed. This chapter provides some of the 
basic information needed to understand and initiate the 
various welding methods and processes. 


5-2

0

200

100300

0

200

100300

0

200

100300

0

200

100300

Oxygen pressure regulator

Acetylene pressure regulator

Acetylene cylinder

Torch

Oxygen cylinder

Figure 5-1. Portable oxy-acetylene welding outfit.

Traditionally, welding is defined as a process that joins metal 
by melting or hammering the work pieces until they are 
united together. With the right equipment and instruction, 
almost anyone with some basic mechanical skill, dexterity, 
and practice can learn to weld.

There are three general types of welding: gas, electric arc, 
and electric resistance. Each type of welding has several 
variations, some of which are used in the construction of 
aircraft. Additionally, there are some new welding processes 
that have been developed in recent years that are highlighted 
for the purpose of information. 

This chapter addresses the welding equipment, methods, 
and various techniques used during the repair of aircraft and 
fabrication of component parts, including the processes of 
brazing and soldering of various metals.

Types of Welding
Gas Welding
Gas welding is accomplished by heating the ends or edges 
of metal parts to a molten state with a high temperature 
flame. The oxy-acetylene flame, with a temperature of 
approximately 6,300 °Fahrenheit (F), is produced with a torch 
burning acetylene and mixing it with pure oxygen. Hydrogen 
may be used in place of acetylene for aluminum welding, but 
the heat output is reduced to about 4,800 °F. Gas welding was 
the method most commonly used in production on aircraft 
materials under 3⁄16-inch in thickness until the mid 1950s, 
when it was replaced by electric welding for economic (not 
engineering) reasons. Gas welding continues to be a very 
popular and proven method for repair operations. 

Nearly all gas welding in aircraft fabrication is performed 
with oxy-acetylene welding equipment consisting of:

• Two cylinders, acetylene and oxygen.

• Acetylene and oxygen pressure regulators and cylinder 
pressure gauges.

• Two lengths of colored hose (red for acetylene and 
green for oxygen) with adapter connections for the 
regulators and torch.

• A welding torch with an internal mixing head, various 
size tips, and hose connections.

• Welding goggles fitted with appropriate colored lenses.

• A flint or spark lighter.

• Special wrench for acetylene tank valve if needed.

• An appropriately-rated fire extinguisher.

The equipment may be permanently installed in a shop, but 
most welding outfits are of the portable type. [Figure 5-1]

Electric Arc Welding
Electric arc welding is used extensively by the aircraft industry 
in both the manufacture and repair of aircraft. It can be used 
satisfactorily to join all weldable metals, provided that the 
proper processes and materials are used. The four types of 
electric arc welding are addressed in the following paragraphs. 

Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW)
Shielded metal arc welding (SMAW) is the most common type 
of welding and is usually referred to as “stick” welding. The 
equipment consists of a metal wire rod coated with a welding 
flux that is clamped in an electrode holder that is connected by a 
heavy electrical cable to a low voltage and high current in either 
alternating current (AC) or direct current (DC), depending on 
the type of welding being done. An arc is struck between the 
rod and the work and produces heat in excess of 10,000 °F, 
which melts both the material and the rod. The welding circuit 
consists of a welding machine, two leads, an electrode holder, 
an electrode, and the work to be welded. [Figure 5-2]

When the electrode is touched to the metal to be welded, 
the circuit is complete and the current flows. The electrode 
is then withdrawn from the metal approximately 1⁄4-inch to 
form an air gap between the metal and the electrode. If the 
correct gap is maintained, the current bridges the gap to form 
a sustained electric spark called the arc. This action melts the 
electrode and the coating of flux.

As the flux melts, it releases an inert gas that shields the 
molten puddle from oxygen in the air to prevent oxidation. 


5-3

Welding cable connector Welding cable 

Generator Electrode holder

Ground cable

Metal being weldedGround cable connector

Figure 5-2. Typical arc welding circuit. 

Figure 5-3. Stick welder–Shielded Metal Arc Welder (SMAW).

The molten flux covers the weld and hardens to an airtight 
slag that protects the weld bead as it cools. Some aircraft 
manufacturers, such as Stinson, used this process for the 
welding of 4130 steel fuselage structures. This was followed 
by heat treatment in an oven to stress relieve and normalize 
the structure. Shown in Figure 5-3 is a typical arc welding 
machine with cables, ground clamp, and electrode holder. 

Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW)  
Gas metal arc welding (GMAW) was formerly called gas 
inert gas (MIG) welding. It is an improvement over stick 
welding because an uncoated wire electrode is fed into and 
through the torch and an inert gas, such as argon, helium, 
or carbon dioxide, flows out around the wire to protect the 
puddle from oxygen. The power supply is connected to the 
torch and the work, and the arc produces the intense heat 
needed to melt the work and the electrode. [Figure 5-4]

Low-voltage, high-current DC is typically used with GMAW 
welding. Figure 5-5 shows the equipment required for a 
typical MIG welding setup. 

This method of welding can be used for large volume 
manufacturing and production work; it is not well suited to 
repair work because weld quality cannot be easily determined 
without destructive testing. Figure 5-6 depicts a typical power 
source used for MIG welding.

Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW)
Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) is a method of electric arc 
welding that fills most of the needs in aircraft maintenance 
and repair when proper procedures and materials are used. It 
is the preferred method to use on stainless steel, magnesium, 
and most forms of thick aluminum. It is more commonly 
known as Tungsten Inert Gas (TIG) welding and by the trade 
names of Heliarc or Heliweld. These names were derived 
from the inert helium gas that was originally used.

The first two methods of electric arc welding that were 
addressed used a consumable electrode that produced the 
filler for the weld. In TIG welding, the electrode is a tungsten 
rod that forms the path for the high amperage arc between it 
and the work to melt the metal at over 5,400 °F. The electrode 
is not consumed and used as filler so a filler rod is manually 
fed into the molten puddle in almost the same manner as 
when using an oxy-acetylene torch. A stream of inert gas, 
such as argon or helium, flows out around the electrode and 
envelopes the arc thereby preventing the formation of oxides 
in the molten puddle. [Figure 5-7]


5-4

Nozzle

Solidified weld metal

Molten weld metal

Shielding gas

Consumable electrode
(machine fed)

G
as

 s
u

p
p

ly
Work

Power source

Shielding gas

Wire drive may be
located in welding gun
handle or at wire reel.

Contactor

Wire drive

Wire reel

Regulator with flowmeter

Controls for governing
wire drive current, gas flow,
and cooling water, if used.

Figure 5-4. Metal inert gas (MIG) welding process. 

Figure 5-5. MIG welding equipment.


5-5

Molten weld metal

Welding torch

Tungsten electrode

Filler wire (hand fed)

Arc

Solidified weld metal

Shielding gas

G
as

 s
u

p
p

ly
Electrode holder

Power source

Filler metal held manually if used

Electrical conductor

Insulating sheath

Gas passages

Work

Regulator with flowmeter

Tungsten electrode

Shielding gas

Figure 5-6. MIG welder–gas metal arc welder (GMAW).

Figure 5-7. Tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding process.

Figure 5-9. TIG welder–gas tungsten arc welder (GTAW).

Figure 5-8. Typical setup for TIG welding.

The versatility of a TIG welder is increased by the choice of 
the power supply being used. DC of either polarity or AC 
may be used. [Figure 5-8]

• Either select the welder setting to DC straight polarity 
(the work being the positive and the torch being 
negative) when welding mild steel, stainless steel, 
and titanium; or

• Select AC for welding aluminum and magnesium. 

Figure 5-9 is a typical power source for TIG welding along 
with a torch, foot operated current control, regulator for inert 
gas, and assorted power cables.


5-6

Tungsten electrode

Outer cool sheath

Inner hot sheath

Arc core

+

−

Figure 5-10. Spot welding thin sheet metal.

Figure 5-11. The plasma welding process.

Figure 5-12. Plasma arc.

Electric Resistance Welding 
Electric resistance welding, either spot welding or seam 
welding, is typically used to join thin sheet metal components 
during the manufacturing process.

Spot Welding
Two copper electrodes are held in the jaws of the spot welding 
machine, and the material to be welded is clamped between 
them. Pressure is applied to hold the electrodes tightly 
together and electrical current flows through the electrodes 
and the material. The resistance of the material being welded 
is so much higher than that of the copper electrodes that 
enough heat is generated to melt the metal. The pressure on 
the electrodes forces the molten spots in the two pieces of 
metal to unite, and this pressure is held after the current stops 
flowing long enough for the metal to solidify. The amount of 
current, pressure, and dwell time are all carefully controlled 
and matched to the type of material and the thickness to 
produce the correct spot welds. [Figure 5-10]

Seam Welding
Rather than having to release the electrodes and move the 
material to form a series of spot welds, a seam-welding machine 
is used to manufacture fuel tanks and other components where 
a continuous weld is needed. Two copper wheels replace 
the bar-shaped electrodes. The metal to be welded is moved 
between them, and electric pulses create spots of molten metal 
that overlap to form the continuous seam.

Plasma Arc Welding (PAW)
Plasma arc welding (PAW) was developed in 1964 as a 
method of bringing better control to the arc welding process. 
PAW provides an advanced level of control and accuracy 

using automated equipment to produce high quality welds 
in miniature and precision applications. Furthermore, PAW 
is equally suited to manual operation and can be performed 
by a person using skills similar to those for GTAW. 

In the plasma welding torch, a nonconsumable tungsten 
electrode is located within a fine-bore copper nozzle. A 
pilot arc is initiated between the torch electrode and nozzle 
tip. This arc is then transferred to the metal being welded. 
[Figure 5-11]

By forcing the plasma gas and arc through a constricted 
orifice, the torch delivers a high concentration of heat to a 
small area. The plasma process produces exceptionally high 
quality welds. [Figure 5-12]


5-7

Plasma gas is normally argon. The torch also uses a secondary 
gas, such as argon/helium or argon/nitrogen, that assists in 
shielding the molten weld puddle and minimizing oxidation 
of the weld. 

Like GTAW, the PAW process can be used to weld most 
commercial metals, and it can be used for a wide variety 
of metal thicknesses. On thin material, from foil to 1⁄8-inch, 
the process is desirable because of the low heat input. The 
process provides relatively constant heat input because arc 
length variations are not very critical. On material thicknesses 
greater than 1⁄8-inch and using automated equipment, a 
keyhole technique is often used to produce full penetration 
single-path welds. In the keyhole technique, the plasma 
completely penetrates the work piece. The molten weld metal 
flows to the rear of the keyhole and solidifies as the torch 
moves on. The high quality welds produced are characterized 
by deep, narrow penetration and a small weld face.

When PAW is performed manually, the process requires 
a high degree of welding skills similar to that required for 
GTAW. However, the equipment is more complex and 
requires a high degree of knowledge to set up and use. The 
equipment required for PAW includes a welding machine, a 
special plasma arc control system, the plasma welding torch 
(water-cooled), the source of plasma and shielding gas, and 
filler material, when required. Because of the cost associated 
with this equipment, this process is very limited outside of 
manufacturing facilities.

Plasma Arc Cutting 
When a plasma cutting torch is used, the gas is usually 
compressed air. The plasma cutting machine works by 
constricting an electrical arc in a nozzle and forcing the 
ionized gas through it. This heats the gas that melts the metal 
which is blown away by the air pressure. By increasing air 
pressure and intensifying the arc with higher voltages, the 
cutter is capable of blasting through thicker metals and 
blowing away the dross with minimal cleanup. 

Plasma arc systems can cut all electrically conductive metals, 
including aluminum and stainless steel. These two metals 
cannot be cut by oxy-fuel cutting systems because they have 
an oxide layer that prevents oxidation from occurring. Plasma 
cutting works well on thin metals and can successfully cut 
brass and copper in excess of two inches thick. 

Plasma cutting machines can rapidly and precisely cut 
through, gouge, or pierce any electrically conductive metal 
without preheating. The plasma cutter produces a precise 
kerf (cut) width and a small heat-affected zone (HAZ) that 
prevents warping and damage.

Gas Welding and Cutting Equipment
Welding Gases  
Acetylene
This is the primary fuel for oxy-fuel welding and cutting. It 
is chemically very unstable, and is stored in special cylinders 
designed to keep the gas dissolved. The cylinders are packed 
with a porous material and then saturated with acetone. When 
the acetylene is added to the cylinder, it dissolves; in this 
solution, it becomes stable. Pure acetylene stored in a free 
state explodes from a slight shock at 29.4 pounds per square 
inch (psi). The acetylene pressure gauge should never be set 
higher than 15 psi for welding or cutting. 

Argon
Argon is a colorless, odorless, tasteless, and non-toxic inert 
gas. Inert gas cannot combine with other elements. It has a 
very low chemical reactivity and low thermal conductivity. 
It is used as a gas shield for the electrode in MIG, TIG, and 
plasma welding equipment. 

Helium
Helium is a colorless, odorless, tasteless, and non-toxic 
inert gas. Its boiling and melting points are the lowest of the 
elements and it normally exists only in gas form. It is used 
as a protective gas shield for many industrial uses including 
electric arc welding.

Hydrogen
Hydrogen is a colorless, odorless, tasteless, and highly 
flammable gas. It can be used at a higher pressure than 
acetylene and is used for underwater welding and cutting. 
It also can be used for aluminum welding using the oxy-
hydrogen process.

Oxygen
Oxygen is a colorless, odorless, and nonflammable gas. It is 
used in the welding process to increase the combustion rate 
which increases the flame temperature of flammable gas. 

Pressure Regulators
A pressure regulator  is attached to a gas cylinder and is used 
to lower the cylinder pressure to the desired working pressure. 
Regulators have two gauges, one indicating the pressure in 
the cylinder and the second showing the working pressure. 
By turning the adjustment knob in or out, a spring operating 
a flexible diaphragm opens or closes a valve in the regulator. 
Turning the knob in causes the flow and pressure to increase; 
backing it out decreases the flow and pressure.


5-8

Figure 5-13. Single-stage acetylene regulator. Note the maximum 
15-psi working pressure. The notched groove cylinder connection 
nut indicates a left-hand thread.

Figure 5-14. Two-stage oxygen regulator. No groove on the cylinder 
connection nut indicates a right-hand thread.

Figure 5-15. Check valves.

There are two types of regulators: single stage and two stage. 
They perform the same function but the two-stage regulator 
maintains a more constant outlet pressure and flow as the 
cylinder volume and pressure drops. Two-stage regulators 
can be identified by a larger, second pressure chamber under 
the regulator knob. [Figures 5-13 and 5-14]

Welding Hose
A welding hose connects the regulators to the torch. It is 
typically a double hose joined together during manufacture. 
The acetylene hose is red and has left hand threads indicated 
by a groove cut into the connection nut. The oxygen hose is 
green and has right hand threads indicated by the absence of 
a groove on the connection nut. 

Welding hoses are produced in different sizes from ¼-inch to 
½-inch inside diameter (ID). The hose should be marked for 
light, standard, and heavy duty service plus a grade indicating 
whether it has an oil- and/or flame-resistant cover. The hose 
should have the date of manufacture, maximum working 
pressure of 200 psi, and indicate that it meets specification 
IP-90 of the Rubber Manufacturers Association and the 
Compressed Gas Association for rubber welding hoses. 
Grade-R hose should only be used with acetylene gas. A 
T-grade hose must be used with propane, MAPP®, and all 
other fuel gases.
   
Check Valves and Flashback Arrestors
The check valve stops the reverse flow of the gas and can 
be installed either between the regulator and the hose or the 
hose and the torch. [Figure 5-15]  Excessive overheating 
of cutting, welding, and heating tips can cause flashback 
conditions. A flashback can be caused when a tip is 
overheated and the gas ignites before passing out of the 
tip. The flame is then burning internally rather than on the 
outside of the tip and is usually identified by a shrill hissing 
or squealing noise. 

A flashback arrestor installed on each hose prevents a high 
pressure flame or oxygen-fuel mixture from being pushed 
back into either cylinder causing an explosion. The flashback 
arrestors incorporate a check valve that stops the reverse flow 
of gas and the advancement of a flashback fire. [Figure 5-16]

Torches
Equal Pressure Torch
The equal pressure torch is the most commonly used torch 
for oxy-acetylene welding. It has a mixing chamber and uses 
acetylene fuel at 1–15 psi. The flame is easy to adjust and 
there is less chance of flashback with this torch. There are 


5-9

Figure 5-16. Flashback arrestors.

Figure 5-17. Torch handle with cutting, heating, and welding tips.

Figure 5-18. Welding goggles.

several small lightweight torches of this type that are ideal 
for aviation welding projects. The Smith Airline™ and the 
Meco Midget™ torches are small enough to be used in close 
confined areas, lightweight enough to reduce fatigue during 
long welding sessions yet, with the appropriate tips, are 
capable of welding 0.250-inch steel.  
  
Injector Torch
The injector torch uses fuel gas at pressures between just 
above 0 and 2 psi. This torch is typically used with propane 
and propylene gas. High-pressure oxygen comes through 
a small nozzle inside the torch head and pulls the fuel gas 
along with it via a venturi effect. The low-pressure injector 
torch is more prone to flashback. 

Cutting Torch
The cutting torch is an attachment added to the torch handle 
that allows the cutting of metal. The cutting process is 
fundamentally the rapid burning or oxidizing of the metal 
in a localized area. The metal is heated to a bright red color 
(1,400 °F to 1,600 °F), which is the kindling temperature, 
using only the preheat jets. Then, a jet of high-pressure 
oxygen released by the lever on the cutting attachment is 
directed against the heated metal. This oxygen blast combines 
with the hot metal and forms an intensely hot oxide. The 
molten oxide is blown down the sides of the cut, heating the 
metal in its path to the kindling temperature as the torch is 
moved along the line of the desired cut. The heated metal 
also burns to an oxide that is blown away on the underside 
of the piece. [Figure 5-17]

Torch Tips
The torch tip delivers and controls the final flow of gases. 
It is important that you use the correct tip with the proper 
gas pressures for the work to be welded satisfactorily. The 
size of the tip opening—not the temperature—determines 
the amount of heat applied to the work. If an excessively 
small tip is used, the heat provided is insufficient to produce 
penetration to the proper depth. If the tip is too large, the heat 

is too great, and holes are burned in the metal. 
Torch tip sizes are designated by numbers. The manufacturer 
can provide a chart with recommended sizes for welding 
specific thicknesses of metal. With use, a torch tip becomes 
clogged with carbon deposits. If it is allowed to contact the 
molten pool, particles of slag may clog the tip. This may 
cause a backfire, which is a momentary backward flow of 
the gases at the torch tip. A backfire is rarely dangerous, but 
molten metal may be splattered when the flame pops. Tips 
should be cleaned with the proper size tip cleaner to avoid 
enlarging the tip opening.

Welding Eyewear
Protective eyewear for use with oxy-fuel welding outfits is 
available in several styles and must be worn to protect the 
welder’s eyes from the bright flame and flying sparks. This 
eyewear is not for use with arc welding equipment. 

Some of the styles available have individual lenses and 
include goggles that employ a head piece and/or an elastic 
head strap to keep them snug around the eyes for protection 
from the occasional showering spark. [Figure 5-18] Another 
popular style is the rectangular eye shield that takes a standard 
2-inch by 4.25-inch lens. This style is available with an 
elastic strap but is far more comfortable and better fitting 
when attached to a proper fitting adjustable headgear. It can 
be worn over prescription glasses, provides protection from 


5-10

Figure 5-20. Torch lighter.

Figure 5-19. Gas welding eye shield attached to adjustable 
headgear.

flying sparks, and accepts a variety of standard shade and 
color lenses. A clear safety glass lens is added in front of the 
shaded lens to protect it from damage. [Figure 5-19]

It was standard practice in the past to select a lens shade for 
gas welding based on the brightness of flame emitting from 
the torch. The darkest shade of lens showing a clear definition 
of the work was normally the most desirable. However, when 
flux was used for brazing and welding, the torch heat caused 
the sodium in the flux to give off a brilliant yellow-orange 
flare, hiding a clear view of the weld area and causing many 
eye problems. 

Various types of lens and colors were tried for periods of time 
without much success. It was not until the late 1980s that 
TM Technologies developed and patented a new green glass 
designed especially for aluminum oxy-fuel welding. It not 
only eliminated the sodium orange flare completely, but also 
provided the necessary protection from ultraviolet, infrared, 
and blue light, and impact to meet the requirements of  the 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z87-1989 
Safety Standards for a special purpose lens. This lens can be 
used for welding and brazing all metals using an oxy-fuel torch. 

Torch Lighters
Torch lighters are called friction lighters or flint strikers. The 
lighter consists of a file-shaped piece of steel, usually recessed 
in a cuplike device, and a replaceable flint, which when drawn 
across the steel produces a shower of sparks to light the fuel 
gas. An open flame or match should never be used to light a 
torch, because accumulated gas may envelop the hand and 
when ignited cause a severe burn. [Figure 5-20] 

Filler Rod
The use of the proper type of filler rod is very important 
for oxy-acetylene welding. This material adds not only 
reinforcement to the weld area, but also desired properties to 
the finished weld. By selecting the proper rod, tensile strength 
or ductility can be secured in a weld. Similarly, the proper rod 
can help retain the desired amount of corrosion resistance. In 

some cases, a suitable rod with a lower melting point helps 
to avoid cracks caused by expansion and contraction.

Welding rods may be classified as ferrous or nonferrous. 
Ferrous rods include carbon and alloy steel rods, as well as 
cast-iron rods. Nonferrous rods include brass, aluminum, 
magnesium, copper, silver, and their various alloys.

Welding rods are manufactured in standard 36-inch lengths 
and in diameters from 1⁄16-inch to 3⁄8-inch. The diameter of the 
rod to be used is governed by the thickness of the metals to 
be joined. If the rod is too small, it cannot conduct heat away 
from the puddle rapidly enough, and a burned hole results. 
A rod too large in diameter draws heat away and chills the 
puddle, resulting in poor penetration of the joined metal. All 
filler rods should be cleaned prior to use.
 
Equipment Setup
Setting up acetylene welding equipment in preparation for 
welding should be accomplished in a systematic and definite 
order to avoid costly damage to equipment and compromising 
the safety of personnel. 

Gas Cylinders
All cylinders should be stored and transported in the upright 
position, especially acetylene cylinders, because they contain 
an absorbent material saturated with liquid acetone. If the 
cylinder were laid on its side, allowing the acetone to enter 
and contaminate the regulator, hose, and torch, fuel starvation 
and a resultant flashback in the system could result. If an 
acetylene cylinder must be placed on its side for a period of 
time, it must be stored in the upright position for at least twice 
as long before being used. Gas cylinders should be secured, 
usually with a chain, in a permanent location or in a suitable 
mobile cart. The cylinder’s protective steel cap should not 
be removed until the cylinder is put into service. 

Regulators
Prior to installing the regulator on a gas cylinder, open the 
cylinder shutoff valve for an instant to blow out any foreign 
material that may be lodged in the outlet. Close the valve and 
wipe off the connection with a clean oil-free cloth. Connect 
the acetylene pressure regulator to the acetylene cylinder 


5-11

and tighten the left-hand nut. Connect the oxygen pressure 
regulator to the oxygen cylinder and tighten the right-hand 
nut. The connection fittings are brass and do not require a lot 
of torque to prevent them from leaking. At this time, check 
to ensure the adjusting screw on each pressure regulator is 
backed out by turning counterclockwise until it turns freely. 

Hoses
Connect the red hose with the left-hand threads to the 
acetylene pressure regulator and the green hose with the 
right-hand threads to the oxygen pressure regulator. This 
is the location, between the regulator and hose, in which 
flashback arrestors should be installed. Again, because the 
fittings are brass and easily damaged, tighten only enough 
to prevent leakage. 

Stand off to the side away from the face of the gauges. Now, 
very slowly open the oxygen cylinder valve and read the 
cylinder gauge to check the contents in the tank. The oxygen 
cylinder shutoff valve has a double seat valve and should be 
opened fully against its stop to seat the valve and prevent a 
leak. The acetylene cylinder shutoff valve should be slowly 
opened just enough to get the cylinder pressure reading on 
the regulator and then one half of a turn more. This allows a 
quick shutoff, if needed. 

NOTE: As a recommended safety practice, the cylinders 
should not be depleted in content below 20 psi. This prevents 
the possible reverse flow of gas from the opposite tank.

Both hoses should be blown out before attaching to the torch. 
This is accomplished for each cylinder by turning the pressure 
adjusting screw in (clockwise) until the gas escapes, and then 
quickly backing the screw out (counterclockwise) to shut 
off the flow. This should be done in a well ventilated open 
space, free from sparks, flames, or other sources of ignition. 

Connecting Torch
Connect the red hose with the left-hand thread connector 
nut to the left-hand thread fitting on the torch. Connect the 
green hose with the right-hand thread connector nut to the 
right-hand thread fitting on the torch. Close the valves on the 
torch handle and check all connections for leaks as follows:

• Turn in the adjusting screw on the oxygen pressure 
regulator until the working pressure indicates 10 psi. 
Turn in the adjusting screw on the acetylene pressure 
regulator until the working pressure indicates 5 psi.

• Back out both adjusting screws on the regulators and 
verify that the working pressure remains steady. If it 
drops and pressure is lost, a leak is indicated between 
the regulator and the torch.

• A general tightening of all connections should fix the 
leak. Repeat a check of the system. 

• If a leak is still indicated by a loss in working pressure, 
a mixture of soapy water on all the connections reveals 
the source of the leak. Never check for a leak with a 
flame because a serious explosion could occur.

Select the Tip Size
Welding and cutting tips are available in a variety of sizes 
for almost any job, and are identified by number. The higher 
the number is, the bigger the hole in the tip is allowing more 
heat to be directed onto the metal and allowing thicker metal 
to be welded or cut.

Welding tips have one hole and cutting tips have a number 
of holes. The cutting tip has one large hole in the center for 
the cutting oxygen and a number of smaller holes around 
it that supply fuel, gas, and oxygen for the preheating 
flame. The selection of the tip size is very important, not 
only for the quality of the weld and/or the efficiency of the 
cutting process, but for the overall operation of the welding 
equipment and safety of the personnel using it. 

Starvation occurs if torch tips are operated at less than 
the required volume of gas, leading to tip overheating 
and possible f lashbacks.  Incorrect  t ip size and 
obstructed tip orifices can also cause overheating and/or  
flashback conditions. 

All fuel cylinders have a limited capacity to deliver gas to 
the tip. That capacity is further limited by the gas contents 
remaining in the cylinder and the temperature of the cylinder.

The following provides some recommended procedures to 
guard against overheating and flashbacks:

• Refer to the manufacturer’s recommendations for tip 
size based on the metal’s thickness.

• Use the recommended gas pressure settings for the tip 
size being used.

• Provide the correct volume of gas as recommended 
for each tip size.

• Do not use an excessively long hose, one with multiple 
splices, or one that may be too small in diameter and 
restrict the flow of gas. 

NOTE: Acetylene is limited to a maximum continuous 
withdrawal rate of one-seventh of the cylinder’s rated 
capacity when full. For example, an acetylene cylinder that 
has a capacity of 330 cubic feet has a maximum withdrawal 
of 47 cubic feet per hour. This is determined by dividing 330 


5-12

Welding Tip Size Conversion Chart

Wire 
Drill

#0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

13

#000

#00

#0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Decimal 
Inch

Metric Equiv.
(mm)

Smiths™
AW1A

Harris 
15

Henrob/
Dillion

Victor J 
Series

#00
#0

0.5

1

1.5

2
2.5

3

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

Meco N 
Midget™

Foil

.025

.040

.050

.063

.100

.188

.25

Aluminum
Thickness (in)

Foil

.015

.032

.046

.062

.093

.125

.187

.250

.312

.375

Steel
Thickness (in)

#00

#0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

AW200

AW20

AW201

AW202
AW203

AW204

AW205
AW206

AW207

AW208

AW209

AW210

0.150
0.279
0.343
0.508
0.559
0.572
0.610
0.635
0.660
0.711
0.742
0.813
0.864
0.889
0.940
1.016
1.041
1.067
1.092
1.181
1.321
1.397
1.511
1.613
1.702
1.854
1.930

1.981

2.083

2.184

2.261

2.362

2.489

2.692

2.794

0.0059
0.0110
0.0135
0.0200
0.0220
0.0225
0.0240
0.0250
0.0260
0.0280
0.0292
0.0320
0.0340
0.0350
0.0370
0.0400
0.0410
0.0420
0.0430
0.0465
0.0520
0.0550
0.0595
0.0635
0.0670
0.0730
0.0760

0.0780

0.0820

0.0860

0.0890

0.0930

0.0980

0.1060

0.1100

97
85
80
76
75
74
73
72
71
70
69
67
66
65
63
60
59
58
57
56
55
54
53
52
51
49
48

47

45

44

43

42

40

36

35

Figure 5-21. Chart of recommended tip sizes for welding various thicknesses of metal.

(cylinder capacity) by 7 (one-seventh of the cylinder capacity).
As a safety precaution, it is recommended that flashback 
arrestors be installed between the regulators and the gas 
supply hoses of all welding outfits. Figure 5-21 shows 
recommended tip sizes of different manufacturers, for 
welding various thickness of metals. 

Adjusting the Regulator Working Pressure
The working pressure should be set according to the 
manufacturer’s recommendation for the tip size that is being 
used to weld or cut. This is a recommended method that works 
for most welding and cutting operations. 

In a well ventilated area, open the acetylene valve on the 
torch and turn the adjusting screw on the acetylene pressure 
regulator clockwise until the desired pressure is set. Close the 
acetylene valve on the torch. Then, set the oxygen pressure in 
the same manner by opening the oxygen valve on the torch 
and turning the adjusting screw clockwise on the oxygen 
regulator until desired pressure is set. Then, close the oxygen 
valve on the torch handle. With the working pressures set, 
the welding or cutting operation can be initiated. 


5-13

A. Neutral flame

B. Carburizing (reducing) flame

C. Oxidizing flame

Figure 5-22. Oxy-acetylene flames.

Lighting and Adjusting the Torch 
With the proper working pressures set for the acetylene and 
oxygen, open the torch acetylene valve a quarter to a half turn. 
Direct the torch away from the body and ignite the acetylene 
gas with the flint striker. Open the acetylene valve until the 
black sooty smoke disappears from the flame. The pure 
acetylene flame is long, bushy, and has a yellowish color. 
Open the torch oxygen valve slowly and the flame shortens 
and turns to a bluish-white color that forms a bright inner 
luminous cone surrounded by an outer flame envelope. This 
is a neutral flame that should be set before either a carburizing 
or oxidizing flame mixture is set.

Different Flames
The three types of flame commonly used for welding are 
neutral, carburizing, and oxidizing. Each serves a specific 
purpose. [Figure 5-22]

Neutral Flame
The neutral flame burns at approximately 5,850 °F at the tip 
of the inner luminous cone and is produced by a balanced 
mixture of acetylene and oxygen supplied by the torch. The 
neutral flame is used for most welding because it does not 
alter the composition of the base metal. When using this 
flame on steel, the molten metal puddle is quiet and clear, 
and the metal flows to give a thoroughly fused weld without 
burning or sparking.

Carburizing Flame
The carburizing flame burns at approximately 5,700 °F at 
the tip of the inner core. It is also referred to as a reducing 
flame because it tends to reduce the amount of oxygen in the 
iron oxides. The flame burns with a coarse rushing sound, 
and has a bluish-white inner cone, a white center cone, and 
a light blue outer cone.

The flame is produced by burning more acetylene than 
oxygen, and can be recognized by the greenish feathery tip at 
the end of the cone. The longer the feather, the more acetylene 
is in the mix. For most welding operations, the length of the 
feather should be about twice the length of the inner cone. 

The carburizing flame is best used for welding high-carbon 
steels, for hard facing, and for welding such nonferrous alloys 
as aluminum, nickel, and Monel.

Oxidizing Flame
The oxidizing flame burns at approximately 6,300 °F and 
is produced by burning an excess of oxygen. It takes about 
two parts of oxygen to one part acetylene to produce this 
flame. It can be identified by the shorter outer flame and the 
small, white, inner cone. To obtain this flame, start with a 
neutral flame and then open the oxygen valve until the inner 
cone is about one-tenth of its original length. The oxidizing 
flame makes a hissing sound, and the inner cone is somewhat 
pointed and purplish in color at the tip.

The oxidizing flame does have some specific uses. A slightly 
oxidizing flame is used for bronze welding (brazing) of steel 
and cast iron. A stronger oxidizing flame is used for fusion 
welding of brass and bronze. If an oxidizing flame is used 
on steel, it causes the molten metal to foam, give off sparks, 
and burn.

Soft or Harsh Flames
With each size of tip, a neutral, carburizing, or oxidizing 
flame can be obtained. It is also possible to obtain a soft or 
harsh flame by decreasing or increasing the working pressure 
of both gases (observing the maximum working pressure of 
15 psi for acetylene gas).

For some work, it may be desirable to have a soft or low 
velocity flame without a reduction of thermal output. This 
can be achieved by reducing the working pressure using a 
larger tip and closing the torch valves until the neutral flame is 
quiet and steady. It is especially desirable to use a soft flame 
when welding aluminum to avoid blowing holes in the metal 
when the puddle is formed. 
  
Handling of the Torch
It should be cautioned that improper adjustment or handling 
of the torch may cause the flame to backfire or, in rare 
cases, to flashback. A backfire is a momentary backward 
flow of gases at the torch tip that causes the flame to go out. 
A backfire may be caused by touching the tip against the 
work, overheating the tip, by operating the torch at other than 
recommended pressures, by a loose tip or head, or by dirt or 
slag in the end of the tip, and may cause molten metal to be 
splattered when the flame pops.


5-14

Figure 5-23. Cutting torch with additional tools.

A flashback is dangerous because it is the burning of gases 
within the torch. It is usually caused by loose connections, 
improper pressures, or overheating of the torch. A shrill 
hissing or squealing noise accompanies a flashback, and 
unless the gases are turned off immediately, the flame may 
burn back through the hose and regulators causing great 
damage and personal injury. The cause of the flashback 
should always be determined and the problem corrected 
before relighting the torch. All gas welding outfits should 
have a flashback arrestor. 
 
Oxy-acetylene Cutting
Cutting ferrous metals by the oxy-acetylene process is 
primarily the rapid burning or oxidizing of the metal in a 
localized area. This is a quick and inexpensive way to cut 
iron and steel where a finished edge is not required.

Figure 5-23 shows an example of a cutting torch. It has 
the conventional oxygen and acetylene valves in the torch 
handle that control the flow of the two gases to the cutting 
head. It also has an oxygen valve below the oxygen lever on 
the cutting head so that a finer adjustment of the flame can 
be obtained.

The size of the cutting tip is determined by the thickness of 
the metal to be cut. Set the regulators to the recommended 
working pressures for the cutting torch based on the tip size 
selected. Before beginning any cutting operation, the area 
should be clear of all combustible material and the proper 
protective equipment should be worn by personnel engaged 
in the cutting operation. 

The flame for the torch in Figure 5-23 is set by first closing 
the oxygen valve below the cutting lever and fully opening the 
oxygen valve on the handle. (This supplies the high-pressure 
oxygen blast when the cutting lever is actuated.) The acetylene 
valve on the handle is then opened and the torch is lit with a 
striker. The acetylene flame is increased until the black soot 
is gone. Then, open the oxygen valve below the cutting lever 
and adjust the flame to neutral. If more heat is needed, open the 
valves to add more acetylene and oxygen. Actuate the cutting 
lever and readjust the preheat flame to neutral if necessary. 

The metal is heated to a bright red color (1,400 °F–1,600 °F, 
which is the kindling or ignition temperature) by the preheat 
orifices in the tip of the cutting torch. Then, a jet of high-
pressure oxygen is directed against it by pressing the oxygen 
lever on the torch. This oxygen blast combines with the 
red-hot metal and forms an intensely hot molten oxide that 
is blown down the sides of the cut. As the torch is moved 
along the intended cut line, this action continues heating 
the metal in its path to the kindling temperature. The metal, 
thus heated, also burns to an oxide that is blown away to the 
underside of the piece.

Proper instruction and practice provides the knowledge and 
skill to become proficient in the technique needed to cut 
with a torch. Hold the torch in either hand, whichever is 
most comfortable. Use the thumb of that hand to operate the 
oxygen cutting lever. Use the other hand to rest the torch on 
and steady it along the cut line. 

Begin at the edge of the metal and hold the tip perpendicular 
to the surface, preheating until the spot turns bright red. 
Lightly depress the cutting lever to allow a shower of sparks 
and molten metal to blow through the cut. Fully depress the 
cutting lever and move the torch slowly in the direction of 
the intended cut. 

Practice and experience allow the technician to learn how to 
judge the speed at which to move the torch. It should be just 
fast enough to allow the cut to penetrate completely without 
excessive melting around the cut. If the torch is moved too fast, 
the metal will not be preheated enough, and the cutting action 
stops. If this happens, release the cutting lever, preheat the 
cut to bright red, depress the lever, and continue with the cut.

Shutting Down the Gas Welding Equipment
Shutting down the welding equipment is fairly simple when 
some basic steps are followed:

• Turn off the flame by closing the acetylene valve on 
the torch first. This shuts the flame off quickly. Then, 
close the oxygen valve on the torch handle. Also, close 
oxygen valve on cutting torch, if applicable. 

• If the equipment is not used in the immediate future 
(approximately the next 30 minutes), the valves on 
the acetylene and oxygen cylinders should be closed 
and pressure relieved from the hoses.

• In a well-ventilated area, open the acetylene valve on 
the torch and allow the gas to escape to the outside 
atmosphere, and then close the valve.

• Open the oxygen valve on the torch, allow the gas to 
escape, and then close the valve.


5-15

Figure 5-24. Hand position for light-gauge materials.

Figure 5-25. Hand position for heavy-gauge materials.

• Close both the acetylene and oxygen regulators by 
backing out the adjusting screw counterclockwise 
until loose.

• Carefully coil the hose to prevent kinking and store it 
to prevent damage to the torch and tip. 

Gas Welding Procedures and Techniques
The material to be welded, the thickness of the metal, the type 
of joint, and the position of the weld dictates the procedure 
and technique to be used.

When light-gauge metal is welded, the torch is usually held 
with the hose draped over the wrist. [Figure 5-24] To weld 
heavy materials, the more common grip may provide better 
control of the torch. [Figure 5-25]

The torch should be held in the most comfortable position that 
allows the tip to be in line with the joint to be welded, and 
inclined between 30° and 60° from the perpendicular. This 
position preheats the edges just ahead of the molten puddle. 
The best angle depends on the type of weld, the amount of 
preheating required, and the thickness and type of metal. 
The thicker the metal, the more vertical the torch must be for 
proper heat penetration. The white cone of the flame should 
be held about 1⁄8-inch from the surface of the metal.

Welding can be performed by pointing the torch flame in the 
direction that the weld is progressing. This is referred to as 
forehand welding, and is the most commonly used method 
for lighter tubing and sheet metal. The filler rod is kept ahead 
of the tip in the direction the weld is going and is added to 
the puddle. 

For welding thick metals or heavy plate, a technique called 
backhand welding can be used. In this method, the torch 
flame is pointed back toward the finished weld and the filler 
rod is added between the flame and the weld. This method 
provides a greater concentration of heat for welding thicker 
metals and would rarely be used in aircraft maintenance. 

Puddle

If the torch is held in the correct position, a small puddle 
of molten metal forms. The puddle should be centered in 
the joint and composed of equal parts of those pieces being 
welded. After the puddle appears, the tip should be moved 
in a semicircular arc or circular motion equally between the 
pieces to ensure an even distribution of heat.

Adding Filler Rod to the Puddle

As the metal melts and the puddle forms, filler rod is needed 
to replace the metal that flows out from around the joint. 


5-16

The rod is added to the puddle in the amount that provides 
for the completed fillet to be built up about one-fourth the 
thickness of the base metal. The filler rod selected should be 
compatible with the base metal being welded. 

Correct Forming of a Weld
The form of the weld metal has considerable bearing upon 
the strength and fatigue resistance of a joint. The strength 
of an improperly made weld is usually less than the strength 
for which the joint was designed. Low-strength welds are 
generally the result of insufficient penetration; undercutting 
of the base metal at the toe of the weld; poor fusion of the 
weld metal with the base metal; trapped oxides, slag, or gas 
pockets in the weld; overlap of the weld metal on the base 
metal; too much or too little reinforcement; or overheating 
of the weld.

Characteristics of a Good Weld
A completed weld should have the following characteristics:

1. The seam should be smooth, the bead ripples evenly 
spaced, and of a uniform thickness.

2. The weld should be built up, slightly convex, thus 
providing extra thickness at the joint.

3. The weld should taper off smoothly into the  
base metal.

4. No oxide should be formed on the base metal close to 
the weld.

5. The weld should show no signs of blowholes, porosity, 
or projecting globules.

6. The base metal should show no signs of burns, pits, 
cracks, or distortion. 

Although a clean, smooth weld is desirable, this characteristic 
does not necessarily mean that the weld is a good one; it may 
be dangerously weak inside. However, when a weld is rough, 
uneven, and pitted, it is almost always unsatisfactory inside. 
Welds should never be filed to give them a better appearance, 
since filing deprives the weld of part of its strength. Welds 
should never be filled with solder, brazing material, or filler 
of any sort.

When it is necessary to reweld a joint, all old weld material 
must be removed before the operation is begun. It must be 
remembered that reheating the area may cause the base metal 
to lose some of its strength and become brittle. This should 
not be confused with a post-weld heat treatment that does not 
raise the metal to a high enough temperature to cause harm 
to the base material.

Oxy-Acetylene Welding of Ferrous Metals 
Steel (Including SAE 4130)
Low-carbon steel, low-alloy steel (e.g., 4130), cast steel, and 
wrought iron are easily welded with the oxy-acetylene flame. 
Low-carbon and low-alloy steels are the ferrous materials 
that are gas welded most frequently. As the carbon content of 
steel increases, it may be repaired by welding using specific 
procedures for various alloy types. Factors involved are the 
carbon content and hardenability. For corrosion-resistant 
and heat-resistant nickel chromium steels, the allowed 
weldability depends upon their stability, carbon content, and 
reheat treatment.

The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) and the 
American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) provide a 
designation system that is an accepted standard for the 
industry. SAE 4130 is an alloy steel that is an ideal material 
for constructing fuselages and framework on small aircraft; it 
is also used for motorcycle and high-end bicycle frames and 
race car frames and roll cages. The tubing has high tensile 
strength, malleability, and is easy to weld. 

The number ‘4130’ is also an AISI 4-digit code that defines 
the approximate chemical composition of the steel. The 
‘41’ indicates a low-alloy steel containing chromium and 
molybdenum (chromoly) and the ‘30’ designates a carbon 
content of 0.3 percent. 4130 steel also contains small amounts 
of manganese, phosphorus, sulfur, and silicon, but like all 
steels, it contains mostly iron.

In order to make a good weld, the carbon content of the 
steel must not be altered to any appreciable degree, nor 
can other atmospheric chemical constituents be added to or 
subtracted from the base metal without seriously altering the 
properties of the metal. However, many welding filler wires 
do contain constituents different from the base material for 
specific reasons, which is perfectly normal and acceptable if 
approved materials are used. Molten steel has a great affinity 
for carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen combining with the molten 
puddle to form oxides and nitrates, both of which lower the 
strength of steel. When welding with an oxy-acetylene flame, 
the inclusion of impurities can be minimized by observing 
the following precautions:

• Maintain an exact neutral flame for most steels and 
a slight excess of acetylene when welding alloys 
with a high nickel or chromium content, such as  
stainless steel.

• Maintain a soft flame and control the puddle.


5-17

• Maintain a flame sufficient to penetrate the metal and 
manipulate it so that the molten metal is protected from 
the air by the outer envelope of flame.

• Keep the hot end of the welding rod in the weld pool 
or within the flame envelope.

• When the weld is complete and still in the red heat, 
circle the outer envelope of the torch around the entire 
weldment to bring it evenly to a dull red. Slowly back 
the torch away from the weldment to ensure a slow 
cooling rate.

Chrome Molybdenum
The welding technique for chrome molybdenum (chrome-
moly) is practically the same as that for carbon steels, except 
for sections over 3⁄16-inch thick. The surrounding area must be 
preheated to a temperature between 300 °F and 400 °F before 
beginning to weld. If this is not done, the sudden quenching 
of the weld area after the weld is complete may cause a 
brittle grain structure of untempered martensite that must 
be eliminated with post-weld heat treatments. Untempered 
martensite is a glass-like structure that takes the place of the 
normally ductile steel structure and makes the steel prone to 
cracking, usually near the edge of the weld. This preheating 
also helps to alleviate some of the distortion caused by 
welding along with using proper practices found in other 
sections of this chapter. 

A soft neutral flame should be used for welding and must be 
maintained during the process. If the flame is not kept neutral, 
an oxidizing flame may cause oxide inclusions and fissures. 
A carburizing flame makes the metal more hardenable by 
raising the carbon content. The volume of the flame must 
be sufficient to melt the base metal, but not hot enough to 
overheat the base metal and cause oxide inclusions or a loss 
of metal thickness. The filler rod should be compatible with 
the base metal. If the weld requires high strength, special low-
alloy filler is used, and the piece is heat treated after welding.

It may be advantageous to TIG weld 4130 chrome-moly 
sections over 0.093-inch thickness followed by a proper 
post-weld heat treatment as this can result in less overall 
distortion. However, do not eliminate the post-weld heat 
treatment as doing so could severely limit the fatigue life of 
the weldment due to the formed martensitic grain structure.

Stainless Steel
The procedure for welding stainless steel is basically the 
same as that for carbon steels. There are, however, some 
special precautions you must take to obtain the best results.

Only stainless steel used for nonstructural members of aircraft 
can be welded satisfactorily. The stainless steel used for 

structural components is cold worked or cold rolled and, if 
heated, loses some of its strength. Nonstructural stainless 
steel is obtained in sheet and tubing form and is often used for 
exhaust collectors, stacks, or manifolds. Oxygen combines 
very readily with this metal in the molten state, and you must 
take extreme care to prevent this from occurring.

A slightly carburizing flame is recommended for welding 
stainless steel. The flame should be adjusted so that a feather 
of excess acetylene, about 1⁄16-inch long, forms around the 
inner cone. Too much acetylene, however, adds carbon to 
the metal and causes it to lose its resistance to corrosion. 
The torch tip size should be one or two sizes smaller than 
that prescribed for a similar gauge of low-carbon steel. The 
smaller tip lessens the chances of overheating and subsequent 
loss of the corrosion-resistant qualities of the metal.

To prevent the formation of chromium oxide, a specially 
compounded flux for stainless steel, should be used. The flux, 
when mixed with water, can be spread on the underside of the 
joint and on the filler rod. Since oxidation must be avoided 
as much as possible, use sufficient flux. The filler rod used 
should be of the same composition as the base metal.

When welding, hold the filler rod within the envelope of the 
torch flame so that the rod is melted in place or melted at the 
same time as the base metal. Add the filler rod by allowing 
it to flow into the molten pool. Do not stir the weld pool, 
because air enters the weld and increases oxidation. Avoid 
rewelding any portion or welding on the reverse side of the 
weld, which results in warping and overheating of the metal.

Another method used to keep oxygen from reaching the 
metal is to surround the weld with a blanket of inert gas. 
This is done by using a TIG welder to perform welding of 
stainless steel. It is a recommended method for excellent 
weld results and does not require the application of flux and 
its subsequent cleanup. 

Oxy-Acetylene Welding of Nonferrous 
Metals
Nonferrous metals are those that contain no iron. Examples 
of nonferrous metals are lead, copper, silver, magnesium, 
and the most important in aircraft construction, aluminum. 
Some of these metals are lighter than the ferrous metals, 
but in most cases, they are not as strong. Aluminum 
manufacturers have compensated for the lack of strength of 
pure aluminum by alloying it with other metals or by cold 
working it. For still greater strength, some aluminum alloys 
are also heat treated.  


5-18

Aluminum Welding
Gas welding of certain aluminum alloys can be accomplished 
successfully, but it requires some practice and the appropriate 
equipment to produce a successful weld. Before attempting 
to weld aluminum for the first time, become familiar with 
how the metal reacts under the welding flame.

A good example for practice and to see how aluminum 
reacts to a welding flame, heat a piece of aluminum sheet 
on a welding bench. Hold a torch with a neutral flame 
perpendicular to the sheet and bring the tip of the inner 
cone almost in contact with the metal. Observe that the 
metal suddenly melts away, almost without any indication, 
and leaves a hole in the metal. Now repeat the operation, 
only this time hold the torch at an angle of about 30° to the 
surface. This allows for better control of the heat and allows 
the surface metal to melt without forming a hole. Practice 
by slowly moving the flame along the surface until the 
puddle can be controlled without melting holes. Once that is 
mastered, practice on flanged joints by tacking and welding 
without filler rod. Then, try welding a butt joint using flux 
and filler rod. Practice and experience provides the visual 
indication of the melting aluminum so that a satisfactory 
weld can be performed. 

Aluminum gas welding is usually confined to material 
between 0.031-inch and 0.125-inch in thickness. The 
weldable aluminum alloys used in aircraft construction are 
1100, 3003, 4043, and 5052. Alloy numbers 6053, 6061, and 
6151 can also be welded, but since these alloys are in the 
heat-treated condition, welding should not be done unless 
the parts can be reheat treated.

Proper preparation prior to welding any metal is essential to 
produce a satisfactory weld. This preparation is especially 
critical during oxy-acetylene welding of aluminum. Select 
the proper torch tip for the thickness of metal being welded. 
Tip selection for aluminum is always one size larger than 
one would normally choose for the same thickness in a steel 
sheet. A rule of thumb: 3⁄4 metal thickness = tip orifice. 

Set the proper regulator pressure using the following method 
for oxy-acetylene welding of aluminum. This method has 
been used by all aircraft factories since World War II. Start 
by slowly opening the valve on the oxygen cylinder all the 
way until it stops to seat the upper packing. Now, barely 
crack open the acetylene cylinder valve until the needle on 
the gauge jumps up, then open one-quarter turn more. Check 
the regulators to ensure the adjusting screws are turned 
counterclockwise all the way out and loose. Now, open both 
torch valves wide open, about two full turns (varies with the 
torch model). Turn the acetylene regulator by adjusting the 
screw until the torch blows a light puff at a two-inch distance. 

Now, hold the torch away from the body and light it with the 
striker, adjusting the flame to a bright yellow bushy flame 
with the regulator screw. Add oxygen by slowly turning in 
the oxygen regulator screw to get a loud blue flame with a 
bright inner cone, perhaps a bit of the “fuel-rich” feather or 
carburizing secondary cone. By alternately turning in each of 
the torch valves a little bit, the flame setting can be lowered 
to what is needed to either tack or weld. 

Special safety eyewear must also be used to protect the 
welder and provide a clear view through the yellow-orange 
flare given off by the incandescing flux. Special purpose 
green-glass lens have been designed and patented especially 
for aluminum oxy-fuel welding by TM Technologies. These 
lenses cut the sodium orange flare completely and provide 
the necessary protection from ultraviolet, infrared, blue light, 
and impact. They meet safety standard ANSI Z87-1989 for 
a special-purpose lens.

Apply flux either to the material, the filler, or both if needed. 
The aluminum welding flux is a white powder mixed one 
part powder to two parts clean spring or mineral water. (Do 
not use distilled water.) Mix a paste that can be brushed on 
the metal. Heating the filler or the part with the torch before 
applying the flux helps the flux dry quickly and not pop off 
when the torch heat approaches. Proper safety precautions, 
such as eye protection, adequate ventilation, and avoiding 
the fumes are recommended.

The material to be welded must be free of oil or grease. It 
should be cleaned with a solvent; the best being denatured 
isopropyl (rubbing) alcohol. A stainless toothbrush should 
be used to scrub off the invisible aluminum oxide film just 
prior to welding but after cleaning with alcohol. Always 
clean the filler rod or filler wire prior to use with alcohol 
and a clean cloth.

Make the best possible fit-up for joints to avoid large gaps 
and select the appropriate filler metal that is compatible with 
the base metal. The filler should not be a larger diameter than 
the pieces to be welded. [Figure 5-26]

Begin by tacking the pieces. The tacks should be applied 
1–11⁄2-inches apart. Tacks are done hot and fast by melting 
the edges of the metal together, if they are touching, or by 
adding filler to the melting edges when there is a gap. Tacking 
requires a hotter flame than welding. So, if the thickness of 
the metal being welded is known, set the length of the inner 
cone of the flame roughly three to four metal thicknesses in 
length for tacking. (Example: .063 aluminum sheet = 3⁄16–1⁄4 
inch inner cone.)


5-19

Filler Metal Selection Chart

Base
Metals

4043 (a)
4047
5556
5183
5554 (d)

1100
3003

5005 5052 60615086
DO NOT 

GAS WELD

5356
5183
5356
5556
5654 (c)

5356
5183
5556

5356
5183
5554
5556
5654 (d)
4043 (a)
5356
5183
5556
5654 (c)
5183
5356
5556
5554 (d)
4043 (a)

4043 (a)
5183
5356
5556
5554 (d)
5654 (c)
5356
5183
5556
4043 (a)
5183
5356
5556
4047

5183
5356
4043 (a,b) 

4043 (a)
4047

5356
4043 (a)

5183
5356
5556
4043 (a,b)

5183
5356
5556
4043 (a,b)
1110
4043 (a)

6061

5086
DO NOT 

GAS WELD

5052

5005

1100
3003

For explanation of (a. b. c. d) see below

Copyright © 1997 TM Technologies

(a)    4043, because of its Si content, is less susceptible to hot cracking 
   but has less ductility and may crack when planished.
(b)    For applications at sustained temperatures above ISOF because 
   of intergranular corrosion.
(c)    Low temperature service at ISOF and below.
(d)    5554 is suitable for elevated temperatures.

NOTE: When choosing between 5356, 5183, 5556, be aware that 
5356 is the weakest and 5556 is the strongest, with 5183 in between. 
Also, 4047 has more Si than 4043, therefore less sensitivity to
hot cracking, slightly higher weld shear strength, and less ductility.

Figure 5-26. Filler metal selection chart.

Once the edges are tacked, begin welding by either starting 
at the second tack and continuing on, or starting the weld one 
inch in from the end and then welding back to the edge of 
the sheet. Allow this initial skip-weld to chill and solidify. 
Then, begin to weld from the previous starting point and 
continue all the way to the end. Decrease the heat at the end 
of the seam to allow the accumulated heat to dissipate. The 
last inch or so is tricky and must be dabbed to prevent blow-
through. (Dabbing is the adding of filler metal in the molten 
pool while controlling the heat on the metal by raising and 
lowering the torch.)

Weld bead appearance, or making ringlets, is caused by the 
movement of the torch and dabbing the filler metal. If the 
torch and add filler metal is moved at the same time, the 

ringlet is more pronounced. A good weld has a bead that is 
not too proud and has penetration that is complete.

Immediately after welding, the flux must be cleaned by using 
hot (180 °F) water and the stainless steel brush, followed by 
liberal rinsing with fresh water. If only the filler was fluxed, 
the amount of cleanup is minimal. All flux residues must 
be removed from voids and pinholes. If any particular area 
is suspect to hidden flux, pass a neutral flame over it and a 
yellow-orange incandescence will betray hiding residues. 

Proper scrubbing with an etching solution and waiting no 
longer than 20 minutes to prime and seal avoids the lifting, 
peeling, or blistering of the finished topcoat. 

Magnesium Welding 
Gas welding of magnesium is very similar to welding 
aluminum using the same equipment. Joint design also 
follows similar practice to aluminum welding. Care must be 
taken to avoid designs that may trap flux after the welding 
is completed, with butt and edge welds being preferred. Of 
special interest is the high expansion rate of magnesium-
based alloys, and the special attention that must be given to 
avoid stresses being set up in the parts. Rigid fixtures should 
be avoided; use careful planning to eliminate distortion. 

In most cases, filler material should match the base material 
in alloy. When welding two different magnesium alloys 
together, the material manufacturer should be consulted 
for recommendations. Aluminum should never be welded 
to magnesium. As in aluminum welding, a flux is required 
to break down the surface oxides and ensure a sound weld. 
Fluxes sold specifically for the purpose of fusion welding 
magnesium are available in powder form and are mixed with 
water in the same manner as for aluminum welding. Use the 
minimum amount of flux necessary to reduce the corrosive 
effects and cleaning time required after the weld is finished. 
The sodium-flare reducing eye protection used for aluminum 
welding is of the same benefit on magnesium welding. 

Welding is done with a neutral flame setting using the same 
tip size for aluminum welding. The welding technique 
follows the same pattern as aluminum with the welding being 
completed in a single pass on sheet gauge material. Generally, 
the TIG process has replaced gas welding of magnesium 
due to the elimination of the corrosive flux and its inherent 
limitations on joint design.

Brazing and Soldering
Torch Brazing of Steel
The definition of joining two pieces of metal by brazing 
typically meant using brass or bronze as the filler metal. 


5-20

However, that definition has been expanded to include any 
metal joining process in which the bonding material is a 
nonferrous metal or alloy with a melting point higher than 
800 °F, but lower than that of the metals being joined. 

Brazing requires less heat than welding and can be used to 
join metals that may be damaged by high heat. However, 
because the strength of a brazed joint is not as great as that 
of a welded joint, brazing is not used for critical structural 
repairs on aircraft. Also, any metal part that is subjected to 
a sustained high temperature should not be brazed.

Brazing is applicable for joining a variety of metals, including 
brass, copper, bronze and nickel alloys, cast iron, malleable 
iron, wrought iron, galvanized iron and steel, carbon steel, 
and alloy steels. Brazing can also be used to join dissimilar 
metals, such as copper to steel or steel to cast iron. 

When metals are joined by brazing, the base metal parts are 
not melted. The brazing metal adheres to the base metal by 
molecular attraction and intergranular penetration; it does 
not fuse and amalgamate with them. 

In brazing, the edges of the pieces to be joined are usually 
beveled as in welding steel. The surrounding surfaces must be 
cleaned of dirt and rust. Parts to be brazed must be securely 
fastened together to prevent any relative movement. The 
strongest brazed joint is one in which the molten filler metal 
is drawn in by capillary action, requiring a close fit.

A brazing flux is necessary to obtain a good union between 
the base metal and the filler metal. It destroys the oxides and 
floats them to the surface, leaving a clean metal surface free 
from oxidation. A brazing rod can be purchased with a flux 
coating already applied, or any one of the numerous fluxes 
available on the market for specific application may be used. 
Most fluxes contain a mixture of borax and boric acid. 

The base metal should be preheated slowly with a neutral soft 
flame until it reaches the flowing temperature of the filler 
metal. If a filler rod that is not precoated with flux is used, 
heat about 2 inches of the rod end with the torch to a dark 
purple color and dip it into the flux. Enough flux adheres to 
the rod that it is unnecessary to spread it over the surface 
of the metal. Apply the flux-coated rod to the red-hot metal 
with a brushing motion, using the side of the rod; the brass 
flows freely into the steel. Keep the torch heat on the base 
metal to melt the filler rod. Do not melt the rod with the torch. 
Continue to add the rod as the brazing progresses, with a 
rhythmic dipping action so that the bead is built to a uniform 
width and height. The job should be completed rapidly and 
with the fewest possible passes of the rod and torch.

Notice that some metals are good conductors of heat and 
dissipate the heat more rapidly away from the joint. Other 
metals are poor conductors that tend to retain the heat and 
overheat readily. Controlling the temperature of the base 
metal is extremely important. The base metal must be hot 
enough for the brazing filler to flow, but never overheated 
to the filler boiling point. This causes the joint to be porous 
and brittle. 

The key to even heating of the joint area is to watch the 
appearance of the flux. The flux should change appearance 
uniformly when even heat is being applied. This is especially 
important when joining two metals of different mass or 
conductivity. 

The brazing rod melts when applied to the red-hot base 
metal and runs into the joint by capillary attraction. (Note 
that molten brazing filler metal tends to flow toward the 
area of higher temperature.) In a torch heated assembly, 
the outer metal surfaces are slightly hotter than the interior 
joint surfaces. The filler metal should be deposited directly 
adjacent to the joint. Where possible, the heat should be 
applied to the assembly on the side opposite to where the 
filler is applied because the filler metal tends to flow toward 
the source of greater heat.

After the brazing is complete, the assembly or component 
must be cleaned. Since most brazing fluxes are water soluble, 
a hot water rinse (120 °F or hotter) and a wire brush remove 
the flux. If the flux was overheated during the brazing 
process, it usually turns green or black. In this case, the flux 
needs to be removed with a mild acid solution recommended 
by the manufacturer of the flux in use. 
 
Torch Brazing of Aluminum
Torch brazing of aluminum is done using similar methods 
as brazing of other materials. The brazing material itself is 
an aluminum/silicon alloy having a slightly lower melting 
temperature than the base material. Aluminum brazing occurs 
at temperatures over 875 °F, but below the melting point of 
the parent metal. This is performed with a specific aluminum 
brazing flux. Brazing is best suited to joint configurations that 
have large surface areas in contact, such as the lap, or for fitting 
fuel tank bungs and fittings. Either acetylene or hydrogen may 
be used as fuel gas, both being used for production work for 
many years. Using eye protection that reduces the sodium 
flare, such as the TM2000 lens, is recommended. 

When using acetylene, the tip size is usually the same, or one 
size smaller than that used for welding of aluminum. A 1–2X 
reducing flame is used to form a slightly cooler flame, and the 
torch is held back at a greater distance using the outer envelope 


5-21

as the heat source rather than the inner cone. Prepare the flux 
and apply in the same manner as the aluminum welding flux, 
fluxing both the base metal and filler material. Heat the parts 
with the outer envelope of the flame, watching for the flux to 
begin to liquefy; the filler may be applied at that point. The 
filler should flow easily. If the part gets overheated, the flux 
turns brown or grey. If this happens, reclean and re-flux the 
part before continuing. Brazing is more easily accomplished 
on 1100, 3003, and 6061 aluminum alloys. 5052 alloy is more 
difficult; proper cleaning and practice are vital. There are 
brazing products sold that have the flux contained in hollow 
spaces in the filler metal itself, which typically work only on 
1100, 3003, and 6061 alloys as the flux is not strong enough 
for use on 5052. Cleaning after brazing is accomplished the 
same as with oxy-fuel welding of aluminum, using hot water 
and a clean stainless brush. The flux is corrosive, so every 
effort should be made to remove it thoroughly and quickly 
after the brazing is completed.
  
Soldering
Soft solder is chiefly used to join copper and brass where a 
leak proof joint is desired, and sometimes for fitting joints 
to promote rigidity and prevent corrosion. Soft soldering is 
generally performed only in minor repair jobs. Soft solder 
is also used to join electrical connections. It forms a strong 
union with low electrical resistance. 

Soft soldering does not require the heat of an oxy-fuel 
gas torch and can be performed using a small propane or 
MAPP® torch, an electrical soldering iron, or in some cases, a 
soldering copper, that is heated by an outside source, such as 
an oven or torch. The soft solders are chiefly alloys of tin and 
lead. The percentages of tin and lead vary considerably in the 
various solders with a corresponding change in their melting 
points ranging from 293 °F to 592 °F. Half-and-half (50/50) 
is the most common general-purpose solder. It contains equal 
portions of tin and lead and melts at approximately 360 °F. 

To get the best results for heat transfer when using an electrical 
soldering iron or a soldering copper, the tip must be clean and 
have a layer of solder on it. This is usually referred to as being 
tinned. The hot iron or copper should be fluxed and the solder 
wiped across the tip to form a bright, thin layer of solder.

Flux is used with soft solder for the same reasons as with 
brazing. It cleans the surface area to be joined and promotes 
the flow by capillary action into the joint. Most fluxes should 
be cleaned away after the job is completed because they cause 
corrosion. Electrical connections should be soldered only 
with soft solder containing rosin. Rosin does not corrode the 
electrical connection. 

Aluminum Soldering
The soldering of aluminum is much like the soldering of 
other metals. The use of special aluminum solders is required, 
along with the necessary flux. Aluminum soldering occurs at 
temperatures below 875 °F. Soldering can be accomplished 
using the oxy-acetylene, oxy-hydrogen, or even an air-
propane torch setup. A neutral flame is used in the case of 
either oxy-acetylene or oxy-hydrogen. Depending on the 
solder and flux type, most common aluminum alloys can be 
soldered. Being of lower melting temperature, a tip one or 
two sizes smaller than required for welding is used, along 
with a soft flame setting. 

Joint configurations for aluminum soldering follow the same 
guidelines as any other base material. Lap joints are preferred 
to tee or butt joints due to the larger surface contact area. 
However parts, such as heat exchanger tubes, are a common 
exception to this.

Normally, the parts are cleaned as for welding or brazing, and 
the flux is applied according to manufacturer’s instructions. 
The parts are evenly heated with the outer envelope of the 
flame to avoid overheating the flux, and the solder is applied 
in a fashion similar to that for other base metals. Cleaning 
after soldering may not be required to prevent oxidation 
because some fluxes are not corrosive. However, it is always 
advisable to remove all flux residues after soldering. 

Aluminum soldering is commonly used in such applications 
as the repair of heat exchanger or radiator cores originally 
using a soldered joint. It is not, however, to be used as a direct 
replacement repair for brazing or welding.
  
Silver Soldering
The principle use of silver solder in aircraft work is in the 
fabrication of high-pressure oxygen lines and other parts that 
must withstand vibration and high temperatures.

Silver solder is used extensively to join copper and its alloys, 
nickel and silver, as well as various combinations of these 
metals and thin steel parts. Silver soldering produces joints 
of higher strength than those produced by other brazing 
processes.

Flux must be used in all silver soldering operations to ensure 
the base metal is chemically clean. The flux removes the film 
of oxide from the base metal and allows the silver solder to 
adhere to it. 


5-22

Solder SolderSolder

Solder

Lap joint Flanged butt joint Edge joint

Easy arc starting

Handles less amperage

Wider arc shape

Good arc stability

Less weld penetration

Shorter electrode life

Usually harder to start the arc

Handles more amperage

Narrower arc shape

Potential for arc wander

Better weld penetration

Longer electrode life

Sharper Electrode Blunter Electrode

Figure 5-27. Silver solder joints.

Figure 5-28. Effects of sharp and blunt electrodes.

All silver solder joints must be physically, as well as 
chemically, clean. The joint must be free of dirt, grease, oil, 
and/or paint. After removing the dirt, grease, etc., any oxide 
(rust and/or corrosion) should be removed by grinding or 
filing the piece until bright metal can be seen. During the 
soldering operation, the flux continues to keep the oxide away 
from the metal and aid in the flow of the solder.

The three recommended types of joint for silver soldering 
are lap, flanged, and edge. With these, the metal is formed 
to furnish a seam wider than the base metal thickness and 
provide the type of joint that holds up under all types of 
loads. [Figure 5-27]

The oxy-acetylene flame for silver soldering should be a 
soft neutral or slightly reducing flame. That is, a flame with 
a slight excess of acetylene. During both preheating and 
application of the solder, the tip of the inner cone of the 
flame should be held about 1⁄2-inch from the work. The flame 
should be kept moving so that the metal does not overheat.

When both parts of the base metal are at the correct 
temperature, the flux flows and solder can be applied 
directly adjacent to the edge of the seam. It is necessary to 
simultaneously direct the flame over the seam and keep it 
moving so that the base metal remains at an even temperature. 

Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (TIG Welding)
The TIG process as it is known today is a combination of 
the work done by General Electric in the 1920s to develop 
the basic process, the work done by Northrop in the 1940s 
to develop the torch itself, and the use of helium-shielding 
gas and a tungsten electrode. The process was developed for 
welding magnesium in the Northrop XP-56 flying wing to 
eliminate the corrosion and porosity issues with the atomic 
hydrogen process they had been using with a boron flux. It 
was not readily used on other materials until the late 1950s 
when it found merit in welding space-age super alloys. It was 
also later used on other metals, such as aluminum and steel, 
to a much greater degree. 

Modern TIG welding machines are offered in DC, AC, or 
with AC/DC configurations, and use either transformer or 
inverter-based technology. Typically, a machine capable of 
AC output is required for aluminum. The TIG torch itself has 

changed little since the first Northrop patent. TIG welding 
is similar to oxy-fuel welding in that the heat source (torch) 
is manipulated with one hand, and the filler, if used, is 
manipulated with the other. A distinct difference is to control 
the heat input to the metal. The heat control may be preset 
and fixed by a machine setting or variable by use of a foot 
pedal or torch-mounted control.

Several types of tungsten electrode are used with the TIG 
welder. Thoriated and zirconiated electrodes have better 
electron emission characteristics than pure tungsten, making 
them more suitable for DC operations on transformer-based 
machines, or either AC or DC with the newer inverter-based 
machines. Pure tungsten provides a better current balance 
with AC welding with a transformer based machine, which 
is advantageous when welding aluminum and magnesium. 
The equipment manufacturers’ suggestions for tungsten type 
and form should be followed as this is an ever changing part 
of the TIG technology.

The shape of the electrode used in the TIG welding torch 
is an important factor in the quality and penetration of the 
weld. The tip of the electrode should be shaped on a dedicated 
grinding stone or a special-purpose tungsten grinder to avoid 
contaminating the electrode. The grinding should be done 
longitudinally, not radially, with the direction of stone travel 
away from the tip. Figure 5-28 shows the effects of a sharp 
versus blunt electrode with transformer-based machines. 

When in doubt, consult the machine manufacturer for the 
latest up-to-date suggestions on tungsten preparation or if 
problems arise.

The general guidelines for weld quality, joint fit prior to 
welding, jigging, and controlling warp all apply to this 
process in the same regard as any other welding method. Of 
particular note are the additional process steps that sometimes 
must be taken to perform a quality weld; these are dealt within 
their appropriate sections.


5-23

TIG Welding 4130 Steel Tubing  
Welding 4130 with TIG is not much different than welding 
other steels as far as technique is concerned. The following 
information generally addresses material under 0.120- 
inch thick.

Clean the steel of any oil or grease and use a stainless steel 
wire brush to clean the work piece prior to welding. This is 
to prevent porosity and hydrogen embrittlement during the 
welding process. The TIG process is highly susceptible to 
these problems, much more so than oxy-acetylene welding, 
so care must be taken to ensure all oils and paint are removed 
from all surfaces of the parts to be welded.

Use a TIG welder with high-frequency starting to eliminate 
arc strikes. Do not weld where there is any breeze or draft; 
the welds should be allowed to cool slowly. Preheating 
is not necessary for tubing of less than 0.120-inch wall 
thickness; however, post-weld tempering (stress relieving) is 
still recommended to prevent the possible brittleness of the 
area surrounding the weld due to the untempered martensite 
formations caused by the rapid cooling of the weld inherent 
to the TIG process.

If you use 4130 filler rod, preheat the work before welding 
and heat treat afterward to avoid cracking. In a critical 
situation such as this, engineering should be done to 
determine preheat and post-weld heat treatment needed for 
the particular application.

Weld at a slower speed, make sufficiently large fillets, and 
make them flat or slightly convex, not concave. After the 
welding is complete, allow the weldment to cool to room 
temperature. Using an oxy-acetylene torch set to a neutral 
flame, heat the entire weldment evenly to 1,100 °F–1,200 °F; 
hold this temperature for about 45 minutes per inch of metal 
thickness. The temperature is generally accepted to be a dull 
red in ambient lighting. Note that for most tubing sections, the 
temperature needs to be held for only a minute or two. This 
process is found in most materials engineering handbooks 
written by The Materials Information Society (ASM) and 
other engineering sources. When working on a critical 
component, seek engineering help if there is any doubt. 
  
TIG Welding Stainless Steel
Stainless steels, or more precisely, corrosion-resisting steels, 
are a family of iron-based metals that contain chromium 
in amounts ranging from 10 percent to about 30 percent. 
Nickel is added to some of the stainless steels, which 
reduces the thermal conductivity and decreases the electrical 
conductivity. The chromium-nickel steels belong in the AISI 
300 series of stainless steels. They are nonmagnetic and have 
austenitic microstructure. These steels are used extensively 

in aircraft in which strength or resistance to corrosion at high 
temperature is required. 

All of the austenitic stainless steels are weldable with most 
welding processes, with the exception of AISI 303, which 
contains high sulfur, and AISI 303Se, which contains 
selenium to improve its machinability. 

The austenitic stainless steels are slightly more difficult 
to weld than mild-carbon steel. They have lower melting 
temperatures, and a lower coefficient of thermal conductivity, 
so welding current can be lower. This helps on thinner 
materials because these stainless steels have a higher 
coefficient of thermal expansion, requiring special 
precautions and procedures to be used to reduce warping and 
distortion. Any of the distortion-reducing techniques, such as 
skip welding or back-step welding, should be used. Fixtures 
and/or jigs should be used where possible. Tack welds should 
be applied twice as often as normal. 

The selection of the filler metal alloy for welding the stainless 
steel is based on the composition of the base metal. Filler 
metal alloys for welding austenitic type stainless include 
AISI No. 309, 310, 316, 317, and 347. It is possible to weld 
several different stainless base metals with the same filler 
metal alloy. Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

Clean the base metal just prior to welding to prevent the 
formation of oxides. Clean the surface and joint edges with 
a nonchlorinated solvent, and brush with a stainless steel 
wire brush to remove the oxides. Clean the filler material in 
the same manner. 

To form a weld bead, move the torch along the joint at 
a steady speed using the forehand method. Dip the filler 
metal into the center of the weld puddle to ensure adequate 
shielding from the gas.

The base metal needs protection during the welding process 
by either an inert gas shield, or a backing flux, on both sides 
of the weld. Back purging uses a separate supply of shielding 
gas to purge the backside of the weld of any ambient air. 
Normally, this requires sealing off the tubular structures or 
using other various forms of shields and tapes to contain 
the shielding gas. A special flux may also be used on the 
inside of tubular structures in place of a back purge. This is 
especially advantageous with exhaust system repairs in which 
sealing off the entire system is time consuming. The flux is 
the same as is used for the oxy-acetylene welding process 
on stainless materials.


5-24

TIG Welding Aluminum
TIG welding of aluminum uses similar techniques and filler 
materials as oxy-fuel welding. Consult with the particular 
welding machine manufacturer for recommendations on 
tungsten type and size, as well as basic machine settings 
for a  particular weldment because this varies with specific 
machine types. Typically, the machine is set to an AC output 
waveform because it causes a cleaning action that breaks 
up surface oxides. Argon or helium shielding gas may be 
used, but argon is preferred because it uses less by volume 
than helium. Argon is a heavier gas than helium, providing 
better cover, and it provides a better cleaning action when 
welding aluminum. 

Filler metal selection is the same as used with the oxy-fuel 
process; however, the use of a flux is not needed as the 
shielding gas prevents the formation of aluminum oxide on 
the surface of the weld pool, and the AC waveform breaks 
up any oxides already on the material. Cleaning of the base 
metal and filler follows the same guidelines as for oxy-fuel 
welding. When welding tanks of any kind, it is a good practice 
to back-purge the inside of the tank with a shielding gas. This 
promotes a sound weld with a smooth inner bead profile that 
can help lessen pinhole leaks and future fatigue failures.

Welding is done with similar torch and filler metal angles as 
in oxy-fuel welding. The tip on the tungsten is held a short 
distance (1⁄16 –1⁄8-inch) from the surface of the material, taking 
care not to ever let the molten pool contact the tungsten and 
contaminate it. Contamination of the tungsten must be dealt 
with by removal of the aluminum from the tungsten and re-
grinding the tip to the factory recommended profile. 

TIG Welding Magnesium
Magnesium alloys can be welded successfully using the 
same type joints and preparation that are used for steel or 
aluminum. However, because of its high thermal conductivity 
and coefficient of thermal expansion, which combine to cause 
severe stresses, distortion, and cracking, extra precautions 
must be taken. Parts must be clamped in a fixture or jig. 
Smaller welding beads, faster welding speed, and the use 
of a lower melting point and lower shrinkage filler rods are 
recommended. 

DC, both straight or reverse polarity, and AC, with 
superimposed high frequency for arc stabilization, are 
commonly used for welding magnesium. DC reverse polarity 
provides better cleaning action of the metal and is preferred 
for manual welding operations. 

AC power sources should be equipped with a primary 
contactor operated by a control switch on the torch or a foot 
control for starting or stopping the arc. Otherwise, the arcing 

that occurs while the electrode approaches or draws away 
from the work piece may result in burned spots on the work. 

Argon is the most common used shielding gas for manual 
welding operations. Helium is the preferred gas for automated 
welding because it produces a more stable arc than argon and 
permits the use of slightly longer arc lengths. Zirconiated, 
thoriated, and pure tungsten electrodes are used for TIG 
welding magnesium alloys.

The welding technique for magnesium is similar to that used 
for other non-ferrous metals. The arc should be maintained 
at about 5⁄16-inch. Tack welds should be used to maintain fit 
and prevent distortion. To prevent weld cracking, weld from 
the middle of a joint towards the end, and use starting and 
run off plates to start and end the weld. Minimize the number 
of stops during welding. After a stop, the weld should be 
restarted about ½-inch from the end of the previous weld. 
When possible, make the weld in one uninterrupted pass. 
    
TIG Welding Titanium
The techniques for welding titanium are similar to those 
required for nickel-based alloys and stainless steels. To 
produce a satisfactory weld, emphasis is placed on the 
surface cleanliness and the use of inert gas to shield the 
weld area. A clean environment is one of the requirements 
to weld titanium.

TIG welding of titanium is performed using DC straight 
polarity. A water-cooled torch, equipped with a ¾-inch 
ceramic cup and a gas lens, is recommended. The gas lens 
provides a uniform, nonturbulent inert gas flow. Thoriated 
tungsten electrodes are recommended for TIG welding of 
titanium. The smallest diameter electrode that can carry 
the required current should be used. A remote contactor 
controlled by the operator should be employed to allow the 
arc to be broken without removing the torch from the cooling 
weld metal, allowing the shielding gas to cover the weld until 
the temperature drops.

Most titanium welding is performed in an open fabrication 
shop. Chamber welding is still in use on a limited basis, but 
field welding is common. A separate area should be set aside 
and isolated from any dirt producing operations, such as 
grinding or painting. Additionally, the welding area should 
be free of air drafts and the humidity should be controlled. 

Molten titanium weld metal must be totally shielded from 
contamination by air. Molten titanium reacts readily with 
oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen; exposure to these elements 
in air or in surface contaminants during welding can adversely 
affect titanium weld properties and cause weld embrittlement. 
Argon is preferred for manual welding because of better 


5-25

arc stability characteristics. Helium is used in automated 
welding and when heavier base metals or deeper penetration 
is required. 

Care must be taken to ensure that the heat affected zones 
and the root side of the titanium welds are shielded until 
the weld metal temperature drops below 800 °F. This can 
be accomplished using shielding gas in three separate gas 
streams during welding.

1. The first shielding of the molten puddle and adjacent 
surfaces is provided by the flow of gas through the 
torch. Manufacturer recommendations should be 
followed for electrodes, tip grinding, cup size, and 
gas flow rates.

2. The secondary, or trailing, shield of gas protects 
the solidified weld metal and the heat affected zone 
until the temperature drops. Trailing shields are 
custom-made to fit a specific torch and a particular  
welding operation.

3. The third, or backup, flow is provided by a shielding 
device that can take many forms. On straight seam 
welds, it may be a grooved copper backing bar 
clamped behind the seam allowing the gas flow in the 
groove and serving as a heat sink. Irregular areas may 
be enclosed with aluminum tents taped to the backside 
of welds and purged with the inert gas. 

Titanium weld joints are similar to those employed with 
other metals. Before welding, the weld joint surfaces must 
be cleaned and remain free of any contamination during the 
welding operation. Detergent cleaners and nonchlorinated 
cleaners, such as denatured isopropyl alcohol, may be used. 
The same requirements apply to the filler rod, it too must 
be cleaned and free of all contaminates. Welding gloves, 
especially the one holding the filler, must be contaminate free. 

A good indication and measure of weld quality for titanium 
is the weld color. A bright silver weld indicates that the 
shielding is satisfactory and the heat affected zone and 
backup was properly purged until weld temperatures 
dropped. Straw-colored films indicate slight contamination, 
unlikely to affect mechanical properties; dark blue films or 
white powdery oxide on the weld would indicate a seriously 
deficient purge. A weld in that condition must be completely 
removed and rewelded. 

Arc Welding Procedures, Techniques, and 
Welding Safety Equipment
Arc welding, also referred to as stick welding, has been 
performed successfully on almost all types of metals. This 
section addresses the procedures as they may apply to 
fusion welding of steel plate and provides the basic steps 

and procedures required to produce an acceptable arc 
weld. Additional instruction and information pertaining 
to arc welding of other metals can be obtained from 
training institutions and the various manufacturers of the  
welding equipment. 
 
The first step in preparing to arc weld is to make certain that 
the necessary equipment is available and that the welding 
machine is properly connected and in good working order. 
Particular attention should be given to the ground connection, 
since a poor connection results in a fluctuating arc, that is 
difficult to control.

When using a shielded electrode, the bare end of the electrode 
should be clamped in its holder at a 90° angle to the jaws. 
(Some holders allow the electrode to be inserted at a 45° 
angle when needed for various welding positions.) 

Before starting to weld, the following typical list of items 
should be checked:

• Is the proper personal safety equipment being used, 
including a welding helmet, welding gloves, protective 
clothing, and footwear; if not, in an adequately 
ventilated area, appropriate breathing equipment?

• Has the ground connection been properly made to the 
work piece and is it making a good connection?

• Has the proper type and size electrode been selected 
for the job?

• Is the electrode properly secured in the holder?

• Does the polarity of the machine coincide with that 
of the electrode?

• Is the machine in good working order and is it adjusted 
to provide the necessary current for the job?

The welding arc is established by touching the base metal 
plate with the electrode and immediately withdrawing it a 
short distance. At the instant the electrode touches the plate, 
a rush of current flows through the point of contact. As the 
electrode is withdrawn, an electric arc is formed, melting a 
spot on the plate and at the end of the electrode. 

Correctly striking an arc takes practice. The main difficulty 
in confronting a beginner in striking the arc is sticking the 
electrode to the work. If the electrode is not withdrawn 
promptly upon contact with the metal, the high amperage 
flows through the electrode causing it to stick or freeze to 
the plate and practically short circuits the welding machine. 
A quick roll of the wrist, either right or left, usually breaks 
the electrode loose from the work piece. If that does not 
work, quickly unclamp the holder from the electrode, and 
turn off the machine. A small chisel and hammer frees the 


5-26

Withdraw to long
arc 1/8" to 3/16"

Long arc immediately
after striking

  Sweeping motion 
of electrode

20°-25°

Figure 5-29. Touch method of starting an arc.

Figure 5-30. Scratch/sweeping method of starting the arc. 

electrode from the metal so it can be regripped in the holder. 
The welding machine can then be turned back on. 

There are two essentially similar methods of striking the arc. 
One is the touch or tapping method. When using this method, 
the electrode should be held in a vertical position and lowered 
until it is an inch or so above the point where the arc is to 
be struck. Then, the electrode is lightly tapped on the work 
piece and immediately lifted to form an arc approximately 
¼-inch in length. [Figure 5-29]

The second (and usually easier to master) is a scratch or 
sweeping method. To strike the arc by the scratch method, the 
electrode is held just above the plate at an angle of 20°–25°. 
The arc should be struck by sweeping the electrode with a 
wrist motion and lightly scratching the plate. The electrode 
is then lifted immediately to form an arc. [Figure 5-30]

Either method takes some practice, but with time and 
experience, it becomes easy. The key is to raise the electrode 
quickly, but only about ¼-inch from the base or the arc is 
lost. If it is raised too slowly, the electrode sticks to the plate. 
 
To form a uniform bead, the electrode must be moved along 
the plate at a constant speed in addition to the downward 

feed of the electrode. If the rate of advance is too slow, a 
wide overlapping bead forms with no fusion at the edges. If 
the rate is too fast, the bead is too narrow and has little or no 
fusion at the plate.

The proper length of the arc cannot be judged by looking at it. 
Instead, depend on the sound that the short arc makes. This is a 
sharp cracking sound, and it should be heard during the time the 
arc is being moved down to and along the surface of the plate.

A good weld bead on a flat plate should have the following 
characteristics:

• Little or no splatter on the surface of the plate.

• An arc crater in the bead of approximately 1⁄16-inch 
when the arc has been broken. 

• The bead should be built up slightly, without metal 
overlap at the top surface.

• The bead should have a good penetration of 
approximately 1⁄16-inch into the base metal.

Figure 5-31 provides examples of operator’s technique and 
welding machine settings.

When advancing the electrode, it should be held at an angle 
of about 20° to 25° in the direction of travel moving away 
from the finished bead. [Figure 5-32]

If the arc is broken during the welding of a bead and the 
electrode is removed quickly, a crater is formed at the point 
where the arc ends. This shows the depth of penetration 
or fusion that the weld is getting. The crater is formed by 
the pressure of the gases from the electrode tip forcing the 
weld metal toward the edges of the crater. If the electrode is 
removed slowly, the crater is filled. 

If you need to restart an arc of an interrupted bead, start 
just ahead of the crater of the previous weld bead, as shown 
in position 1, Figure 5-33. Then, the electrode should be 
returned to the back edge of the crater (step 2). From this 
point, the weld may be continued by welding right through the 
crater and down the line of weld as originally planned (step 3). 

Once a bead has been formed, every particle of slag must 
be removed from the area of the crater before restarting the 
arc. This is accomplished with a pick hammer and wire brush 
and prevents the slag from becoming trapped in the weld. 

Multiple Pass Welding
Groove and fillet welds in heavy metals often require the 
deposit of a number of beads to complete a weld. It is 
important that the beads be deposited in a predetermined 
sequence to produce the soundest welds with the best 


5-27

Good weld

Travel too fast

Travel too slow

Arc too short

Arc too long

Amperage too high

Amperage too low

Examples of Good and Bad Stick Welds

1/16 " to 1/8 " arc length

20°
 to 2

5°

1
2 3

Crater

Figure 5-31. Examples of good and bad stick welds. 

Figure 5-32. Angle of electrode.

Figure 5-33. Restarting the arc. 

proportions. The number of beads is determined by the 
thickness of the metal being welded.

Plates from 1⁄8-inch to ¼-inch can be welded in one pass, but 
they should be tacked at intervals to keep them aligned. Any 
weld on a plate thicker than ¼-inch should have the edges 
beveled and multiple passes.

The sequence of the bead deposits is determined by the 
kind of joint and the position of the metal. All slag must be 
removed from each bead before another bead is deposited. 

Typical multiple-pass groove welding of butt joints is shown 
in Figure 5-34.

Techniques of Position Welding
Each time the position of a welded joint or the type of joint 
is changed, it may be necessary to change any one or a 
combination of the following:

• Current value

• Electrode

• Polarity

• Arc length

• Welding technique

Current values are determined by the electrode size, as well 
as the welding position. Electrode size is governed by the 
thickness of the metal and the joint preparation. The electrode 
type is determined by the welding position. Manufacturers 
specify the polarity to be used with each electrode. Arc length 


5-28

1
2
3

1
2
3

1
2

3 4
5

6

2
5

6 10
11

12

1

7
3

4
8

9

First pass-string bead, second, and third weave pattern.

On plate thicknesses 3/4" or more, double vee
the edges and use multiple-pass welding.

Notice the variations of edge preparation and bead
patterns as stock becomes progressively larger.

A

B

C

CraterSpatter

Spatter

CraterBead build up

1/16" Penetration

1/16" Penetration

Bead weld
No overlapNo overlap

Square groove weldA Double “V” groove weldB

Single “V” groove weldC Single bevel groove weldD

Reinforcement of weld Reinforcement of weld

Reinforcement of weld Reinforcement of weld

Figure 5-34. Multiple-pass groove welding of butt joints.

Figure 5-35. Proper bead weld. 

Figure 5-36. Groove welds on butt joints in the flat position.

is controlled by a combination of the electrode size, welding 
position, and welding current.

Since it is impractical to cite every possible variation 
occasioned by different welding conditions, only the 
information necessary for the commonly used positions and 
welds is discussed here.

Flat Position Welding
There are four types of welds commonly used in flat position 
welding: bead, groove, fillet, and lap joint. Each type is 
discussed separately in the following paragraphs.

Bead Weld
The bead weld utilizes the same technique that is used when 
depositing a bead on a flat metal surface. [Figure 5-35] The 
only difference is that the deposited bead is at the butt joint 
of two steel plates, fusing them together. Square butt joints 
may be welded in one or multiple passes. If the thickness of 
the metal is such that complete fusion cannot be obtained 
by welding from one side, the joint must be welded from 
both sides. Most joints should first be tack-welded to ensure 
alignment and reduce warping. 

Groove Weld
Groove welding may be performed on a butt joint or an 
outside corner joint. Groove welds are made on butt joints 
where the metal to be welded is ¼-inch or more in thickness. 
The butt joint can be prepared using either a single or double 
groove depending on the thickness of the plate. The number 
of passes required to complete a weld is determined by 
the thickness of the metal being welded and the size of the 
electrode being used. 

Any groove weld made in more than one pass must have 
the slag, spatter, and oxide carefully removed from all 


5-29

1/4" Leg size

Dire
ctio

n of
 we

ldin
g

Short arc

45°

Roo
t of weld 

Profile view

3/8"

3/8"

30°

1
2

Figure 5-37. Tee joint fillet weld. 

Figure 5-38. Typical lap joint fillet weld.

previous weld deposits before welding over them. Some of 
the common types of groove welds performed on butt joints 
in the flat position are shown in Figure 5-36.

Fillet Weld
Fillet welds are used to make tee and lap joints. The electrode 
should be held at an angle of 45° to the plate surface. The 
electrode should be tilted at an angle of about 15° in the 
direction of welding. Thin plates should be welded with little 
or no weaving motion of the electrode and the weld is made 
in one pass. Fillet welding of thicker plates may require two 
or more passes using a semicircular weaving motion of the 
electrode. [Figure 5-37]

Lap Joint Weld
The procedure for making fillet weld in a lap joint is similar 
to that used in the tee joint. The electrode is held at about a 
30° angle to the vertical and tilted to an angle of about 15° 
in the direction of welding when joining plates of the same 
thickness. [Figure 5-38]

Vertical Position Welding 
Vertical positing welding includes any weld applied to a 
surface inclined more than 45° from the horizontal. Welding 
in the vertical position is more difficult than welding in the 

flat position because of the force of gravity. The molten metal 
has the tendency to run down. To control the flow of molten 
metal, the voltage and current adjustments of the welding 
machine must be correct. 

The current setting, or amperage, is less for welding in 
the vertical position than for welding in the flat position 
for similar size electrodes. Additionally, the current used 
for welding upward should be set slightly higher than the 
current used for welding downward on the same work piece. 
When welding up, hold the electrode 90° to the vertical, and 
weld moving the bead upward. Focus on welding the sides 
of the joint and the middle takes care of itself. In welding 
downward, with the hand below the arc and the electrode 
tilted about 15° upward, the weld should move downward. 

Overhead Position Welding
Overhead position welding is one of the most difficult in 
welding since a very short arc must be constantly maintained 
to control the molten metal. The force of gravity tends to 
cause the molten metal to drop down or sag from the plate, 
so it is important that protective clothing and head gear be 
worn at all times when performing overhead welding. 

For bead welds in an overhead position, the electrode should 
be held at an angle of 90° to the base metal. In some cases 
where it is desirable to observe the arc and the crater of the 
weld, the electrode may be held at an angle of 15° in the 
direction of welding. 

When making fillet welds on overhead tee or lap joints, a 
short arc should be held, and there should be no weaving of 
the electrode. The arc motion should be controlled to secure 
good penetration to the root of the weld and good fusion to the 
plates. If the molten metal becomes too fluid and tends to sag, 
the electrode should be whipped away quickly from the center 
ahead of the weld to lengthen the arc and allow the metal to 
solidify. The electrode should then be returned immediately 
to the crater of the weld and the welding continued.

Anyone learning or engaged in arc welding should always 
have a good view of the weld puddle. Otherwise there is no 
way to ensure that the welding is in the joint and keeping 
the arc on the leading edge of the puddle. For the best view, 
the welder should keep their head off to the side and out of 
the fumes so they can see the puddle. 
 
Expansion and Contraction of Metals
The expansion and contraction of metal is a factor taken into 
consideration during the design and manufacturing of all 
aircraft. It is equally important to recognize and allow for the 
dimensional changes and metal stress that may occur during 
any welding process.


5-30

Butt joint Lap joint Tee joint

Corner joint Edge joint

Figure 5-39. Allowance for a straight butt weld when joining steel 
sheets.

Figure 5-40. Basic joints.

Heat causes metals to expand; cooling causes them to 
contract. Therefore, uneven heating causes uneven expansion, 
and uneven cooling causes uneven contraction. Under such 
conditions, stresses are set up within the metal. These forces 
must be relieved, and unless precautions are taken, warping 
or buckling of the metal takes place. Likewise, on cooling, if 
nothing is done to take up the stress set up by the contraction 
forces, further warping may result; or if the metal is too heavy 
to permit this change in shape, the stresses remain within 
the metal itself.

The coefficient of linear expansion of a metal is the amount 
in inches that a one inch piece of metal expands when its 
temperature is raised 1 °F. The amount that a piece of metal 
expands when heat is applied is found by multiplying the 
coefficient of linear expansion by the temperature rise and 
multiplying that product by the length of the metal in inches.

Expansion and contraction have a tendency to buckle and warp 
thin sheet metal 1⁄8-inch or thinner. This is the result of having 
a large surface area that spreads heat rapidly and dissipates it 
soon after the source of heat is removed. The most effective 
method of alleviating this situation is to remove the heat 
from the metal near the weld, preventing it from spreading 
across the whole surface area. This can be done by placing 
heavy pieces of metal, known as chill bars, on either side of 
the weld; to absorb the heat and prevent it from spreading. 
Copper is most often used for chill bars because of its ability to 
absorb heat readily. Welding fixtures sometimes use this same 
principle to remove heat from the base metal. Expansion can 
also be controlled by tack welding at intervals along the joint.

The effect of welding a seam longer than 10 or 12 inches is 
to draw the seam together as the weld progresses. If the edges 
of the seam are placed in contact with each other throughout 
their length before welding starts, the far ends of the seam 
actually overlap before the weld is completed. This tendency 
can be overcome by setting the pieces to be welded with the 
seam spaced correctly at one end and increasing the space 
at the opposite end. [Figure 5-39]

The amount of space allowed depends on the type of material, 
the thickness of the material, the welding process being used, 
and the shape and size of the pieces to be welded. Instruction 
and/or welding experience dictates the space needed to 
produce a stress-free joint.

The weld is started at the correctly spaced end and proceeds 
toward the end that has the increased gap. As the seam is 
welded, the space closes and should provide the correct gap 
at the point of welding. Sheet metal under 1⁄16-inch can be 
handled by flanging the edges, tack welding at intervals, and 
then by welding between the tacks.

There are fewer tendencies for plate stock over 1⁄8-inch to 
warp and buckle when welded because the greater thickness 
limits the heat to a narrow area and dissipates it before it 
travels far on the plate.

Preheating the metal before welding is another method 
of controlling expansion and contraction. Preheating is 
especially important when welding tubular structures and 
castings. Great stress can be set up in tubular welds by 
contraction. When welding two members of a tee joint, one 
tube tends to draw up because of the uneven contraction. If 
the metal is preheated before the welding operation begins, 
contraction still takes place in the weld, but the accompanying 
contraction in the rest of the structure is at almost the same 
rate, and internal stress is reduced. 
 
Welded Joints Using Oxy-Acetylene 
Torch
Figure 5-40 shows various types of basic joints.

Butt Joints
A butt joint is made by placing two pieces of material edge to 
edge, without overlap, and then welding. A plain butt joint is 


5-31

Flanged Plain

Single bevel Double bevel

Plain Single bevel Double bevel

Figure 5-41. Types of butt joints.

Figure 5-42. Types of tee joints showing filler penetration.

Thin stock Thick stock

A B

Figure 5-43. Edge joints.

Figure 5-44. Corner joints.

Closed type Open type

A

Braced

C

B

used for metals from 1⁄16-inch to 1⁄8-inch in thickness. A filler 
rod is used when making this joint to obtain a strong weld. 

The flanged butt joint can be used in welding thin sheets, 1⁄16-
inch or less. The edges are prepared for welding by turning 
up a flange equal to the thickness of the metal. This type of 
joint is usually made without the use of a filler rod.

If the metal is thicker than 1⁄8-inch, it may be necessary to 
bevel the edges so that the heat from the torch can completely 
penetrate the metal. These bevels may be either single 
or double-bevel type or single or double-V type. A filler 
rod is used to add strength and reinforcement to the weld. 
[Figure 5-41]

Repair of cracks by welding may be considered just another 
type of butt joint. The crack should be stop drilled at either 
end and then welded like a plain butt joint using filler rod. 
In most cases, the welding of the crack does not constitute 
a complete repair and some form of reinforcement is still 
required, as described in following sections. 
 
Tee Joints
A tee joint is formed when the edge or end of one piece is 
welded to the surface of another. [Figure 5-42] These joints 
are quite common in aircraft construction, particularly in 
tubular structures. The plain tee joint is suitable for most 
thicknesses of metal used in aircraft, but heavier thicknesses 
require the vertical member to be either single or double-
beveled to permit the heat to penetrate deeply enough. The 

dark areas in Figure 5-42 show the depth of heat penetration 
and fusion required. It is a good practice to leave a gap 
between the parts, about equal to the metal thickness to aid 
full penetration of the weld. This is common when welding 
from only one side with tubing clusters. Tight fitment of the 
parts prior to welding does not provide for a proper weldment 
unless full penetration is secured, and this is much more 
difficult with a gapless fitment. 

Edge Joints
An edge joint is used when two pieces of sheet metal must be 
fastened together and load stresses are not important. Edge 
joints are usually made by bending the edges of one or both 
parts upward, placing the two ends parallel to each other, 
and welding along the outside of the seam formed by the two 
joined edges. The joint shown in Figure 5-43A requires no 
filler rod since the edges can be melted down to fill the seam. 
The joint shown in Figure 5-43B, being thicker material, 
must be beveled for heat penetration; filler rod is added for 
reinforcement.

Corner Joints
A corner joint is made when two pieces of metal are 
brought together so that their edges form a corner of a 
box or enclosure. [Figure 5-44] The corner joint shown in 
Figure 5-44A requires no filler rod, since the edges fuse 
to make the weld. It is used where the load stress is not 
important. The type shown in Figure 5-44B is used on heavier 


5-32

Single lap Double lap

A

11/2 A

11/2 B

B

Thickness of patch
plate same as 
longeron thickness

Longeron dented at a station

Patch plate before forming and weldingPatch plate formed and welded to tubes

Figure 5-45. Single and double lap joints.

Figure 5-46. Repair of tubing dented at a cluster.

metals, and filler rod is added for roundness and strength. 
If a higher stress is to be placed on the corner, the inside is 
reinforced with another weld bead. [Figure 5-44C]

Lap Joints
The lap joint is seldom used in aircraft structures when 
welding with oxy-acetylene, but is commonly used and joined 
by spot welding. The single lap joint has very little resistance 
to bending, and cannot withstand the shearing stress to which 
the weld may be subjected under tension or compression 
loads. The double lap joint offers more strength, but requires 
twice the amount of welding required on the simpler, more 
efficient butt weld. [Figure 5-45]

Repair of Steel Tubing Aircraft Structure 
by Welding   
Dents at a Cluster Weld
Dents at a cluster weld can be repaired by welding a formed 
steel patch plate over the dented area and surrounding 
tubes. Remove any existing finish on the damaged area and 
thoroughly clean prior to welding.

To prepare the patch plate, cut a section from a steel sheet of 
the same material and thickness as the heaviest tube damaged. 

Fashion the reinforcement plate so that the fingers extend 
over the tubes a minimum of 1½ times the respective tube 
diameter. The plate may be cut and formed prior to welding 
or cut and tack welded to the cluster, then heated and formed 
around the joint to produce a snug smooth contour. Apply 
sufficient heat to the plate while forming so there is a gap of 
no more than 1⁄16-inch from the contour of the joint to the plate. 

In this operation, avoid unnecessary heating and exercise care 
to prevent damage at the point of the angle formed by any 
two adjacent fingers of the plate. After the plate is formed 
and tack welded to the joint, weld all the plate edges to the 
cluster joint. [Figure 5-46]

Dents Between Clusters
A damaged tubular section can be repaired using welded 
split sleeve reinforcement. The damaged member should be 
carefully straightened and should be stop drilled at the ends 
of any cracks with a No. 40 drill bit.

Select a length of steel tube of the same material and at 
least the same wall thickness having an inside diameter 
approximately equal to the outside diameter of the 
damaged tube. 

Diagonally cut the selected piece at a 30° angle on both ends 
so the minimum distance of the sleeve from the edge of the 
crack or dent is not less than 1½ times the diameter of the 
damaged tube. Then, cut through the entire length of the 
sleeve and separate the half sections as shown in Figure 5-47. 
Clamp the two sleeve sections in the proper position on the 


5-33

Reinforcement tube split

A

11/2 A

11/2 A Weld

30°

30°

Weld

Dented or bent tube

Cracked tube

Figure 5-47. Repair using welded sleeve.

A

1/2 A 1/2 A
A A

Replacement tube

30°
Original tube

Inside sleeve tube

3/4 A

Rosette weld

1/8" gap for weldings

Figure 5-48. Splicing with inner sleeve method.

damaged area of the tube. Weld the reinforcement sleeve 
along the length of the two sides, and weld both ends of the 
sleeve to the damaged tube. 

Tube Splicing with Inside Sleeve Reinforcement
If a partial replacement of the tube is necessary, do an 
inner sleeve splice, especially where you want a smooth  
tube surface.

Make a diagonal cut to remove the damaged section of the 
tube, and remove the burrs from the inner and outer cut edges 
with a file or similar means. Diagonally cut a replacement 
steel tube of the same material, diameter, and wall thickness 
to match the length of the removed section of the damaged 
tube. The replacement tube should allow a 1⁄8-inch gap for 
welding at each end to the stubs of the original tube. 

Select a length of steel tubing of the same material and at 
least the same wall thickness with an outside diameter equal 
to the inside diameter of the damaged tube. From this inner 
sleeve tube material, cut two sections of tubing, each of 
such a length that the ends of the inner sleeve is a minimum 
distance of 1½ times the tube diameter from the nearest end of 
the diagonal cut. Tack the outer and inner replacement tubes 
using rosette welds. Weld the inner sleeve to the tube stubs 
through the 1⁄8-inch gap forming a weld bead over the gap 
and joining with the new replacement section. [Figure 5-48]

Tube Splicing with Outer Split Sleeve 
Reinforcement
If partial replacement of a damaged tube is necessary, make 
the outer sleeve splice using a replacement tube of the same 
diameter and material. [Figures 5-49 and 5-50]

To perform the outer sleeve repair, remove the damaged 
section of the tube, utilizing a 90° cut at either end. Cut a 
replacement steel tube of the same material, diameter, and 
at least the same wall thickness to match the length of the 
removed portion of the damaged tube. The replacement 
tube must bear against the stubs of the original tube with 
a tolerance of ±1⁄64-inch. The material selected for the 
outer sleeve must be of the same material and at least the 
same wall thickness as the original tube. The clearance 
between the inside diameter of the sleeve and the outside 


5-34

A

1/4 A

A

Rosette welds may be omitted when sleeves fit tightly.

30°

Original tube

Replacement tube

1
/2 

A
1
/2 

A Weld

A30°

A

1/4 AA

Rosette welds may be omitted when sleeves fit tightly.
Original tube Replacement tube

1
/2 

A
1
/2 

A
Fish-mouth sleeve

Weld

A30°

A

Alternative split sleeve splice

Original tube 1/4 A Weld here first.
Four rosette welds

1/2 A 1/2 A
30° 1/8" Gap for welding

If outside diameter of original tube is less than 1 inch, split sleeve may
be made from steel tube or sheet steel. Use same material of at least
the same gauge.

1/2 A1/2 A

1/4 A

Rosette weld
A

1/2 A
A

1/2 A
A Replacement tube

30°

Original tube Sleeve tube
30° 30°

Allow 1/8" gap between sleeves for weldings.
Weld

B

C

D

Original tube Original tube

Sleeve tube Sleeve tube

Original tube

C

D

1/2 D

B
1/2 B

1/4 B
1/2 C

1/4 C 1/4 D

Original tube

Figure 5-50. Tube replacement at a cluster by outer sleeve method. 

Figure 5-49. Splicing by the outer sleeve method. 

diameter of the original tube may not exceed 1⁄16-inch. 
From this outer sleeve tube material, either cut diagonally or 
fishmouth two sections of tubing, each of such a length that 
the nearest end of the outer sleeve is a minimum distance 
of 1½ tube diameters from the end of the cut on the original 
tube. Use the fish mouth sleeve wherever possible. Remove 

all burrs from the edges of the replacement tube, sleeves, and 
the original tube stubs.

Slip the two sleeves over the replacement tube, align the 
replacement tube with the original tube stubs, and slip the 
sleeves over the center of each joint. Adjust the sleeves to 
the area to provide maximum reinforcement.

Tack weld the two sleeves to the replacement tube in 
two places before welding ends. Apply a uniform weld 
around both ends of one of the reinforcement sleeves and 
allow the weld to cool. Then, weld around both ends of 
the remaining reinforcement tube. Allow one sleeve weld 
to cool before welding the remaining tube to prevent  
undue warping. 

Landing Gear Repairs
Some components of a landing gear may be repaired 
by welding while others, when damaged, may require 
replacement. Representative types of repairable and 
nonrepairable landing gear assemblies are shown in 
Figure 5-51.

The landing gear types shown in A, B, and C of this figure 
are repairable axle assemblies. They are formed from steel 
tubing and may be repaired by any of the methods described 
in this chapter or in FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 43.13-1, 
Acceptable Methods, Techniques, and Practices—Aircraft 
Inspection and Repair. However, it must be determined if 
the assemblies were heat treated. Assemblies originally heat 
treated must be reheat treated after a welding repair. 


5-35

A

B

C

D

E

Figure 5-51. Representative types of repairable and nonrepairable landing gear assemblies. 

The landing gear assembly type D is generally nonrepairable 
for the following reasons:

1. The lower axle stub is usually made from a highly 
heat-treated nickel alloy steel and machined to close 
tolerances. It should be replaced when damaged.

2. During manufacture, the upper oleo section of the 
assembly is heat treated and machined to close 
tolerances to assure proper functioning of the shock 
absorber. These parts would be distorted by any 
welding repair and should be replaced if damaged to 
ensure the part was airworthy.

The spring-steel leaf, shown as type E, is a component of 
a standard main landing gear on many light aircraft. The 
spring-steel part is, in general, nonrepairable, should not be 
welded on, and should be replaced when it is excessively 
sprung or otherwise damaged. 

Streamline tubing, used for some light aircraft landing gear, 
may be repaired using a round insert tube of the same material 
and having a wall thickness of one gauge thicker than the 
original streamline tube and inserting and welding as shown 
in Figure 5-52.


5-36

Gap 1/8
Weld

at least 1 1/2 C at least 1 1/2 C

30°

3C

R = A2

Form inside tube to fit

A B
C

S.L. size A B C 6A

0.496
0.619
0.743
0.867
0.991
1.115
1.239

1.340
1.670
2.005
2.339
2.670
3.008
3.342

0.560
0.690
0.875
1.000
1.125
1.250
1.380

0.380
0.380
0.500
0.500
0.500
0.500
0.500

1"
11/4"
11/2"
13/4"
2" 
21/4" 
21/2" 

Round insert tube (B) should be of same material and
one gauge thicker than original streamline tube (C).

A = Slot width (original tube)
B = Outside diameter (insert tube)
C = Streamline tube length of major axis

Gap 1/8
Size of rosettes = 1/4 C 
Drill outside tubes only.45°

L = maximum insert length

Saw .08 C off of T.E. and weld

A

B C

Weld

A A11/2 A AA 11/2 AB2A 2A

1
/2 

A

1
/2 

A

S.L. size A B C 6A

5.160
6.430
7.720
9.000

10.300
11.580
12.880

1.340
1.670
2.005
2.339
2.670
3.008
3.342

0.572
0.714
0.858
1.000
1.144
1.286
1.430

0.382
0.476
0.572
0.667
0.763
0.858
0.954

1"
11/4"
11/2"
13/4"
2" 
21/4" 
21/2" 

Insert tube is of same streamline tubing as original.
A = 2/3" B
B = minor axis length of original streamline tube
C = major axis length of original streamline tube

Figure 5-52. Streamline landing gear repair using round tube.

Figure 5-53. Streamline tube splice using split insert.

If all members of the mount are out of alignment, the mount 
should be replaced with one supplied by the manufacturer 
or with one built to conform to the manufacturer’s drawings 
and specifications.

Minor damage, such as a crack adjacent to an engine 
attachment lug, can be repaired by rewelding the ring and 
extending a gusset or a mounting lug past the damaged 
area. Engine mount rings that are extensively damaged must 
not be repaired unless the method of repair is specifically 
approved by FAA Engineering, a Designated Engineering 
Representative (DAR), or the repair is accomplished in 
accordance with FAA-approved instructions.

If the manufacturer stress relieved the engine mount after 
welding, the engine mount should again be stress relieved 
after weld repairs are made.
  
Rosette Welding
Rosette welds are used on many of the type repairs that were 
previously discussed. They are holes, typically one-fourth 
the diameter of the original tube, drilled in the outer splice 
and welded around the circumference for attachment to the 
inner replacement tube or original tube structure.

The streamline landing gear tube may also be repaired by 
inserting a tube of the same streamline original tubing and 
welding. This can be accomplished by cutting off the trailing 
edge of the insert and fitting it into the original tube. Once 
fitted, remove the insert, weld the trailing edge back together, 
and reinsert into the original tube. Use the figures and weld 
as indicated in Figure 5-53.

Engine Mount Repairs
All welding on an engine mount should be performed by 
an experienced welder and be of the highest quality, since 
vibration tends to accentuate any minor defect. 

The preferred method to repair an engine mount member 
is by using a larger diameter replacement tube telescoped 
over the stub of the original member using fish-mouth and 
rosette welds. 30° scarf welds are also acceptable in place 
of the fish-mouth welds.

One of the most important aspects to keep in mind when 
repairing an engine mount is that the alignment of the 
structure must be maintained. This can be accomplished by 
attaching to a fixture designed for that purpose, or bolting the 
mount to an engine and/or airframe before welding. 

All cracked welds should be ground out and only high-grade 
filler rod of the appropriate material should be used.

