
3-1

Chapter 3

Aircraft Fabric 
Covering
General History
Fabric-covered aircraft play an important role in the history of 
aviation. The famous Wright Flyer utilized a fabric-covered 
wood frame in its design, and fabric covering continued 
to be used by many aircraft designers and builders during 
the early decades of production aircraft. The use of fabric 
covering on an aircraft offers one primary advantage: light 
weight. In contrast, fabric coverings have two disadvantages: 
flammability and lack of durability. 


3-2

Figure 3-1. Examples of aircraft produced using fabric skin. 

Finely woven organic fabrics, such as Irish linen and cotton, 
were the original fabrics used for covering airframes, but 
their tendency to sag left the aircraft structure exposed to the 
elements. To counter this problem, builders began coating the 
fabrics with oils and varnishes. In 1916, a mixture of cellulose 
dissolved in nitric acid, called nitrate dope, came into use as 
an aircraft fabric coating. Nitrate dope protected the fabric, 
adhered to it well, and tautened it over the airframe. It also 
gave the fabric a smooth, durable finish when dried. The 
major drawback to nitrate dope was its extreme flammability.

To address the flammability issue, aircraft designers tried 
a preparation of cellulose dissolved in butyric acid called 
butyrate dope. This mixture protected the fabric from dirt 
and moisture, but it did not adhere as well to the fabric as 
nitrate dope. Eventually, a system combining the two dope 
coatings was developed. First, the fabric was coated with 
nitrate dope for its adhesion and protective qualities. Then, 
subsequent coats of butyrate dope were added. Since the 
butyrate dope coatings reduced the overall flammability of 
the fabric covering, this system became the standard fabric 
treatment system.

The second problem, lack of durability, stems from the 
eventual deterioration of fabric from exposure to the elements 
that results in a limited service life. Although the mixture of 
nitrate dope and butyrate dope kept out dirt and water, solving 
some of the degradation issue, it did not address deterioration 
caused by ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun. Ultraviolet 
radiation passed through the dope and degraded not only the 
fabric, but also the aircraft structure underneath. Attempts to 
paint the coated fabric proved unsuccessful, because paint 
does not adhere well to nitrate dope. Eventually, aluminum 
solids were added to the butyrate coatings. This mixture 
reflected the sun’s rays, prevented harmful UV rays from 
penetrating the dope, and protected the fabric, as well as the 
aircraft structure. 
 
Regardless of treatments, organic fabrics have a limited 
lifespan; cotton or linen covering on an actively flown aircraft 
lasts only about 5–10 years. Furthermore, aircraft cotton has 
not been available for over 25 years. As the aviation industry 
developed more powerful engines and more aerodynamic 
aircraft structures, aluminum became the material of 
choice. Its use in engines, aircraft frames, and coverings 
revolutionized aviation. As a covering, aluminum protected 
the aircraft structure from the elements, was durable, and 
was not flammable. 

Although aluminum and composite aircraft dominate modern 
aviation, advances in fabric coverings continue to be made 
because gliders, home-built, and light sport aircraft, as well 
as some standard and utility certificated aircraft, are still  

produced with fabric coverings. [Figure 3-1] The nitrate/
butyrate dope process works well, but does not mitigate 
the short lifespan of organic fabrics. It was not until the 
introduction of polyester fabric as an aircraft covering in 
the 1950s that the problem of the limited lifespan of fabric 
covering was solved. The transition to polyester fabric had 
some problems because the nitrate and butyrate dope coating 
process is not as suitable for polyester as it is for organic 
fabrics. Upon initial application of the dopes to polyester, 
good adhesion and protection occurred; as the dopes dried, 
they would eventually separate from the fabric. In other 
words, the fabric outlasted the coating. 

Eventually, dope additives were developed that minimized 
the separation problem. For example, plasticizers keep the 
dried dope flexible and nontautening dope formulas eliminate 
separation of the coatings from the fabric. Properly protected 
and coated, polyester lasts indefinitely and is stronger 
than cotton or linen. Today, polyester fabric coverings are 
the standard and use of cotton and linen on United States 
certificated aircraft has ceased. In fact, the long staple cotton 
from which grade-A cotton aircraft fabric is made is no longer 
produced in this country. 

Re-covering existing fabric aircraft is an accepted maintenance 
procedure. Not all aircraft covering systems include the use 
of dope coating processes. Modern aircraft covering systems 
that include the use of nondope fabric treatments show no 
signs of deterioration even after decades of service. In this 


3-3

S
e
lv

a
g
e
 e

d
g
e

S
e
lv

a
g
e
 e

d
g
e

Pinked edge

Bi
as

Fill

Warp

First application

Second application
(applied when first 

coat is tacky)

Figure 3-3. A single cross coat is made up of two coats of paint applied 90° to each other.

Figure 3-2. Aircraft fabric nomenclature.

chapter, various fabrics and treatment systems are discussed, 
as well as basic covering techniques.

Fabric Terms
To facilitate the discussion of fabric coverings for aircraft, 
the following definitions are presented. Figure 3-2 illustrates 
some of these items.

• Warp—the direction along the length of fabric.

• Fill or weave—the direction across the width of the 
fabric.

• Count—the number of threads per inch in warp or 
filling.

• Ply—the number of yarns making up a thread.

• Bias—a cut, fold, or seam made diagonally to the warp 
or fill threads.

• Pinked edge—an edge which has been cut by machine 
or special pinking shears in a continuous series of Vs 
to prevent raveling. 

• Selvage edge—the edge of cloth, tape, or webbing 
woven to prevent raveling.

• Greige—condition of polyester fabric upon completion 
of the production process before being heat shrunk.

• Cross-coat—brushing or spraying where the second 
coat is applied 90° to the direction the first coat was 
applied. The two coats together make a single cross 
coat. [Figure 3-3]

Legal Aspects of Fabric Covering
When a fabric-covered aircraft is certificated, the aircraft 
manufacturer uses materials and techniques to cover the 
aircraft that are approved under the type certificate issued 
for that aircraft. The same materials and techniques must be 
used by maintenance personnel when replacing the aircraft 
fabric. Descriptions of these materials and techniques are 

in the manufacturer’s service manual. For example, aircraft 
originally manufactured with cotton fabric can only be 
re-covered with cotton fabric unless the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) approves an exception. Approved 
exceptions for alternate fabric-covering materials and 
procedures are common. Since polyester fabric coverings 
deliver performance advantages, such as lighter weight, 
longer life, additional strength, and lower cost, many older 
aircraft originally manufactured with cotton fabric have 
received approved alteration authority and have been re-
covered with polyester fabric. 


3-4

There are three ways to gain FAA approval to re-cover an 
aircraft with materials and processes other than those with 
which it was originally certificated. One is to do the work in 
accordance with an approved supplemental type certificate 
(STC). The STC must specify that it is for the particular 
aircraft model in question. It states in detail exactly what 
alternate materials must be used and what procedure(s) must 
be followed. Deviation from the STC data in any way renders 
the aircraft unairworthy. The holder of the STC typically sells 
the materials and the use of the STC to the person wishing 
to re-cover the aircraft. 

The second way to gain approval to re-cover an aircraft with 
different materials and processes is with a field approval. A 
field approval is a one-time approval issued by the FAA Flight 
Standards District Office (FSDO) permitting the materials 
and procedures requested to replace those of the original 
manufacturer. A field approval request is made on FAA Form 
337. A thorough description of the materials and processes 
must be submitted with proof that, when the alteration is 
completed, the aircraft meets or exceeds the performance 
parameters set forth by the original type certificate. 

The third way is for a manufacturer to secure approval 
through the Type Certificate Data Sheet (TCDS) for a new 
process. For example, Piper Aircraft Co. originally covered 
their PA-18s in cotton. Later, they secured approval to 
recover their aircraft with Dacron fabric. Recovering an older 
PA-18 with Dacron in accordance with the TCDS would be 
a major repair, but not an alteration as the TCDS holder has 
current approval for the fabric. 

Advisory Circular (AC) 43.13-1, Acceptable Methods, 
Techniques, and Practices—Aircraft Inspection and Repair, 
contains acceptable practices for covering aircraft with fabric. 
It is a valuable source of general and specific information on 
fabric and fabric repair that can be used on Form 337 to justify 
procedures requested for a field approval. Submitting an FAA 
Form 337 does not guarantee a requested field approval. The 
FSDO inspector considers all aspects of the procedures and 
their effect(s) on the aircraft for which the request is being 
filed. Additional data may be required for approval. 

Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 
43, Appendix A, states which maintenance actions are 
considered major repairs and which actions are considered 
major alterations. Fabric re-covering is considered a major 
repair and FAA Form 337 is executed whenever an aircraft is 
re-covered with fabric. Appendix A also states that changing 
parts of an aircraft wing, tail surface, or fuselage when not 
listed in the aircraft specifications issued by the FAA is a 
major alteration. This means that replacing cotton fabric with 
polyester fabric is a major alteration. A properly executed 

FAA Form 337 also needs to be approved in order for this 
alteration to be legal. 

FAA Form 337, which satisfies the documentation requirements 
for major fabric repairs and alterations, requires participation of 
an FAA-certificated Airframe and Powerplant (A&P) mechanic 
with an Inspection Authorization (IA) in the re-covering 
process. Often the work involved in re-covering a fabric aircraft 
is performed by someone else, but under the supervision of the 
IA (IA certification requires A&P certification). This typically 
means the IA inspects the aircraft structure and the re-cover job 
at various stages to be sure STC or field approval specifications 
are being followed. The signatures of the IA and the FSDO 
inspector are required on the approved FAA Form 337. The 
aircraft logbook also must be signed by the FAA-certificated 
A&P mechanic. It is important to contact the local FSDO before 
making any major repair or alteration. 

Approved Materials 
There are a variety of approved materials used in aircraft 
fabric covering and repair processes. In order for the items 
to legally be used, the FAA must approve the fabric, tapes, 
threads, cords, glues, dopes, sealants, coatings, thinners, 
additives, fungicides, rejuvenators, and paints for the 
manufacturer, the holder of an STC, or a field approval.

Fabric 
A Technical Standard Order (TSO) is a minimum performance 
standard issued by the FAA for specified materials, parts, 
processes, and appliances used on civil aircraft. For example, 
TSO-C15d, Aircraft Fabric, Grade A, prescribes the minimum 
performance standards that approved aircraft fabric must 
meet. Fabric that meets or exceeds the TSO can be used as a 
covering. Fabric approved to replace Grade-A cotton, such as 
polyester, must meet the same criteria. TSO-C15d also refers 
to another document, Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) 
Aerospace Material Specification (AMS) 3806D, which details 
properties a fabric must contain to be an approved fabric for 
airplane cloth. Lighter weight fabrics typically adhere to the 
specifications in TSO-C14b, which refers to SAE AMS 3804C. 

When a company is approved to manufacture or sell an 
approved aviation fabric, it applies for and receives a Parts 
Manufacturing Approval (PMA). Currently, only a few 
approved fabrics are used for aircraft coverings, such as 
the polyester fabrics Ceconite™, Stits/Polyfiber™, and 
Superflite™. These fabrics and some of their characteristics 
are shown in Figure 3-4. The holders of the PMA for these 
fabrics have also developed and gained approval for the 
various tapes, chords, threads, and liquids that are used 
in the covering process. These approved materials, along 
with the procedures for using them, constitute the STCs for 
each particular fabric covering process. Only the approved 


3-5

Approved Aircraft Fabrics

Fabric
Name or Type

Ceconite™ 101

Ceconite™ 102

Polyfiber™ Heavy Duty-3

Polyfiber™ Medium-3

Polyfiber™ Uncertified Light

Superflight™ SF 101

Superflight™ SF 102

Superflight™ SF 104

Grade A Cotton

3.5

3.16

3.5

3.16

1.87

3.7

2.7

1.8

4.5

C-15d

C-15d

C-15d

C-15d

C-15d

C-15d

C-15d

69 x 63

60 x 60

69 x 63

60 x 60

90 x 76

70 x 51

72 x 64

94 x 91

80 x 84

125,116

106,113

125,116

106,113

66,72

80,130

90,90

75,55

80,80

Weight
(oz/sq yd)

Count
(warp x fill)

TSONew Breaking 
Strength (lb)

(warp, fill)

Minimum Deteriorated 
Breaking Strength

70% of original specified fabric

70% of original specified fabric

70% of original specified fabric

70% of original specified fabric

uncertified

70% of original specified fabric

70% of original specified fabric

uncertified

56 lb/in (70% of New)

Figure 3-5. Inter-rib bracing holds the ribs in place during the 
covering process. 

Figure 3-4. Approved fabrics for covering aircraft.

materials can be used. Substitution of other materials is 
forbidden and results in the aircraft being unairworthy.
 
Other Fabric Covering Materials
The following is an introduction to the supplemental materials 
used to complete a fabric covering job per manufacturer’s 
instruction or a STC.

Anti-Chafe Tape
Anti-chafe tape is used on sharp protrusions, rib caps, metal 
seams, and other areas to provide a smoother surface to keep 
the fabric from being torn. It is usually self-adhesive cloth 
tape and is applied after the aircraft is cleaned, inspected, 
and primed, but before the fabric is installed.

Reinforcing Tape
Reinforcing tape is most commonly used on rib caps after 
the fabric covering is installed to protect and strengthen the 
area for attaching the fabric to the ribs.

Rib Bracing
Rib bracing tape is used on wing ribs before the fabric is 
installed. It is applied spanwise and alternately wrapped 
around a top rib cap and then a bottom rib cap progressing 
from rib to rib until all are braced. [Figure 3-5] Lacing 
the ribs in this manner holds them in the proper place and 
alignment during the covering process.

Surface Tape
Surface tape, made of polyester material and often pre-
shrunk, is obtained from the STC holder. This tape, also 
known as finishing tape, is applied after the fabric is installed. 
It is used over seams, ribs, patches, and edges. Surface tape 
can have straight or pinked edges and comes in various 
widths. For curved surfaces, bias cut tape is available, which 
allows the tape to be shaped around a radius. 

Rib Lacing Cord
Rib lacing cord is used to lace the fabric to the wing ribs. 
It must be strong and applied as directed to safely transfer 
in-flight loads from the fabric to the ribs. Rib lacing cord is 


3-6

Rib cap

Screws

Clips

PK screw

Rib

Fabric

Reinforcing tape

Washer

Martin clip

Section of rib

Trailing edge

Rivets

Lace

Figure 3-6. Clips, screws, rivets, or lace are used to attach the 
fabric to wing and empennage ribs. 

available in a round or flat cross-section. The round cord is 
easier to use than the flat lacing, but if installed properly, the 
flat lacing results in a smoother finish over the ribs.

Sewing Thread
Sewing of polyester fabric is rare and mostly limited to the 
creation of prefitted envelopes used in the envelope method 
covering process. When a fabric seam must be made with no 
structure underneath it, a sewn seam could be used. Polyester 
threads of various specifications are used on polyester fabric. 
Different thread is specified for hand sewing versus machine 
sewing. For hand sewing, the thread is typically a three-ply, 
uncoated polyester thread with a 15-pound tensile strength. 
Machine thread is typically four-ply polyester with a 10- 
pound tensile strength.

Special Fabric Fasteners
Each fabric covering job involves a method of attaching 
the fabric to wing and empennage ribs. The original 
manufacturer’s method of fastening should be used. In 
addition to lacing the fabric to the ribs with approved rib 
lacing cord, special clips, screws, and rivets are employed 
on some aircraft. [Figure 3-6] The first step in using any 
of these fasteners is to inspect the holes into which they fit. 
Worn holes may have to be enlarged or re-drilled according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Use of approved fasteners 
is mandatory. Use of unapproved fasteners can render the 
covering job unairworthy if substituted. Screws and rivets 
often incorporate the use of a plastic or aluminum washer. 
All fasteners and rib lacing are covered with finishing tape 
once installed to provide a smooth finish and airflow.

Grommets
Grommets are used to create reinforced drain holes in the 
aircraft fabric. Usually made of aluminum or plastic, they 
are glued or doped into place on the fabric surface. Once 
secured, a hole is created in the fabric through the center of 
the grommet. Often, this is done with a hot soldering pencil 
that also heat seals the fabric edge to prevent raveling. 
Seaplane grommets have a shield over the drain hole to 
prevent splashed water from entering the interior of the 
covered structure and to assist in siphoning out any water 
from within. [Figure 3-7] Drain holes using these grommets 
must be made before the grommets are put in place. Note that 
some drain holes do not require grommets if they are made 
through two layers of fabric.

Inspection Rings
The structure underneath an aircraft covering must be 
inspected periodically. To facilitate this in fabric-covered 
aircraft, inspection rings are glued or doped to the fabric. 
They provide a stable rim around an area of fabric that can be 
cut to allow viewing of the structure underneath. The fabric 


3-7

Figure 3-8. Inspection rings and an inspection cover. 

Figure 3-7. Plastic, aluminum, and seaplane grommets are used to 
reinforce drain holes in the fabric covering. 

remains uncut until an inspection is desired. The rings are 
typically plastic or aluminum with an approximately three-
inch inside diameter. Spring clip metal panel covers can be 
fitted to close the area once the fabric inside the inspection 
ring has been cut for access. [Figure 3-8] The location 
of the inspection rings are specified by the manufacturer. 
Additional rings are sometimes added to permit access to 
important areas that may not have been fitted originally with 
inspection access.

Primer
The airframe structure of a fabric covered aircraft must be 
cleaned, inspected, and prepared before the fabric covering 
process begins. The final preparation procedure involves 
priming the structure with a treatment that works with the 
adhesive and first coats of fabric sealant that are to be utilized. 
Each STC specifies which primers, or if a wood structure, 
which varnishes are suitable. Most often, two-part epoxy 
primers are used on metal structure and two-part epoxy 
varnishes are used on wood structure. Utilize the primer 
specified by the manufacturer’s or STC’s instructions.

Fabric Cement
Modern fabric covering systems utilize special fabric cement 
to attach the fabric to the airframe. There are various types of 
cement. [Figure 3-9] In addition to good adhesion qualities, 
flexibility, and long life, fabric cements must be compatible 
with the primer and the fabric sealer that are applied before 
and after the cement. 

Fabric Sealer
Fabric sealer surrounds the fibers in the fabric with a 
protective coating to provide adhesion and keep out dirt and 
moisture. The sealer is the first coat applied to the polyester 
fabric after it is attached to the airframe and heat shrunk to 
fit snugly. Dope-based fabric coating systems utilize non-
tautening nitrate dope as the primary fabric sealant. The 
application of tautening dope may cause the fabric to become 
too taut resulting in excess stress on the airframe that could 
damage it. Nondope coating systems use proprietary sealers 
that are also nontautening. [Figure 3-9] 

Fillers
After the fabric sealer is applied, a filler is used. It is sprayed 
on in a number of cross coats as required by the manufacturer 
or the fabric covering process STC. The filler contains 
solids or chemicals that are included to block UV light from 
reaching the fabric. Proper fill coating is critical because 
UV light is the single most destructive element that causes 
polyester fabric to deteriorate. Dope-based processes use 
butyrate dope fillers while other processes have their own 
proprietary formulas. When fillers and sealers are combined, 
they are known as fabric primers. Aluminum pastes and 
powders, formerly added to butyrate dope to provide the 
UV protection, have been replaced by premixed formulas.

Topcoats
Once the aircraft fabric has been installed, sealed, and fill-
coat protected, finishing or topcoats are applied to give 
the aircraft its final appearance. Colored butyrate dope is 
common in dope-based processes, but various polyurethane 
topcoats are also available. It is important to use the topcoat 
products and procedures specified in the applicable STC to 
complete an airworthy fabric re-covering job.

The use of various additives is common at different stages 
when utilizing the above products. The following is a short 
list of additional products that facilitate the proper application 
of the fabric coatings. Note again that only products approved 
under a particular STC can be used. Substitution of similar 
products, even though they perform the same basic function, 
is not allowed.

• A catalyst accelerates a chemical reaction. Catalysts 
are specifically designed for each product with which 
they are mixed. They are commonly used with epoxies 
and polyurethanes. 

• A thinner is a solvent or mixture of solvents added 
to a product to give it the proper consistency for 
application, such as when spraying or brushing.


3-8

Aircraft Covering Systems

Covering System

PFU 1020
PFU 1030

PFUW 1050

Nitrate Dope

Poly-brush

EkoFill

Dacproofer

SF6500

PFU 1020
PFU 1030

PFUW 1050

Rand-O-Fill

Poly-spray



EkoFIll

SrayFil

SF6500

CHSM Color 
Coat

Colored 
Butyrate Dope
Ranthane 
Polyurethane

Vinyl Poly-tone,
Aero-Thane, or 
Ranthane
Polyurethane

EkoPoly

Tinted Butyrate 
Dope
Superflite™ 
CAB

STC # Allowable Fabrics Base FillerCement UV Block Topcoats

UA-55

New Super 
Seam

Poly-tak

EkoBond

U-500

U-500

Urethane

Water

Dope

Vinyl

Water-borne

Dope

Urethane

Ceconite™ 
Poly-Fiber™ 
Superflite™

Ceconite™

Poly-Fiber™

Ceconite™ 
Poly-Fiber™

Superflite™ 
101,102
Superflite™ 
101,102

SA7965SW

SA4503NM

SA1008WE

SA01734SE

SA00478CH
and others

Air-Tech

Ceconite™/
Randolph System

Stits/Poly-Fiber™

Stewart System

Superflite™
  • System1
  • System VI

APPROVED PROPRIETARY PRODUCT NAME

Figure 3-9. Examples of FAA-approved fabric covering processes. 

• A retarder is added to a product to slow drying time. 
Used mostly in dope processes and topcoats, a retarder 
allow more time for a sprayed coating to flow and 
level, resulting in a deeper, glossier finish. It is used 
when the working temperature is elevated slightly 
above the ideal temperature for a product. It also can 
be used to prevent blushing of a dope finish when high 
humidity conditions exist.

• An accelerators contains solvents that speed up the 
drying time of the product with which it is mixed. 
It is typically used when the application working 
temperature is below that of the ideal working 
temperature. It can also be used for faster drying when 
airborne contaminants threaten a coating finish. 

• Rejuvenator, used on dope finishes only, contains 
solvents that soften coatings and allow them to flow 
slightly. Rejuvenator also contains fresh plasticizers 
that mix into the original coatings. This increases the 
overall flexibility and life of the coatings. 

• Fungicide and mildewicide additives are important 
for organic fabric covered aircraft because fabrics, 
such as cotton and linen, are hosts for fungus and 

mildew. Since fungus and mildew are not concerns 
when using polyester fabric, these additives are not 
required. Modern coating formulas contain premixed 
anti-fungal agents, providing sufficient insurance 
against the problem of fungus or mildew.

Available Covering Processes
The covering processes that utilize polyester fabric are the 
primary focus of this chapter. Examples of FAA-approved 
aircraft covering processes are listed in Figure 3-9. The 
processes can be distinguished by the chemical nature of the 
glue and coatings that are used. A dope-based covering process 
has been refined out of the cotton fabric era, with excellent 
results on polyester fabric. In particular, plasticizers added to 
the nitrate dope and butyrate dopes minimize the shrinking and 
tautening effects of the dope, establish flexibility, and allow 
esthetically pleasing tinted butyrate dope finishes that last 
indefinitely. Durable polyurethane-based processes integrate 
well with durable polyurethane topcoat finishes. Vinyl is the 
key ingredient in the popular Poly-Fiber covering system. Air 
Tech uses an acetone thinned polyurethane compatible system.


3-9

The most recent entry into the covering systems market is the 
Stewart Finishing System that uses waterborne technology 
to apply polyurethane coatings to the fabric. The glue used 
in the system is water-based and nonvolatile. The Stewart 
Finishing System is Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
compliant and STC approved. Both the Stewart and Air Tech 
systems operate with any of the approved polyester fabrics 
as stated in their covering system STCs. 

All the modern fabric covering systems listed in Figure 3-9 
result in a polyester fabric covered aircraft with an indefinite 
service life. Individual preferences exist for working with the 
different approved processes. A description of basic covering 
procedures and techniques common to most of these systems 
follows later in this chapter.

Ceconite™, Polyfiber™, and Superflight™ are STC-approved 
fabrics with processes used to install polyester fabric 
coverings. Two companies that do not manufacturer their own 
fabric have gained STC approval for covering accessories 
and procedures to be used with these approved fabrics. The 
STCs specify the fabrics and the proprietary materials that are 
required to legally complete the re-covering job. 

The aircraft fabric covering process is a three-step process. 
First, select an approved fabric. Second, follow the applicable 
STC steps to attach the fabric to the airframe and to protect it 
from the elements. Third, apply the approved topcoat to give 
the aircraft its color scheme and final appearance. 

Although Grade-A cotton can be used on all aircraft originally 
certificated to be covered with this material, approved 
aircraft cotton fabric is no longer available. Additionally, 
due to the shortcomings of cotton fabric coverings, most of 
these aircraft have been re-covered with polyester fabric. In 
the rare instance the technician encounters a cotton fabric 
covered aircraft that is still airworthy, inspection and repair 
procedures specified in AC 43.13-1, Chapter 2, Fabric 
Covering, should be followed.

Determining Fabric Condition—Repair or 
Recover?
Re-covering an aircraft with fabric is a major repair and 
should only be undertaken when necessary. Often a repair 
to the present fabric is sufficient to keep the aircraft 
airworthy. The original manufacturer’s recommendations 
or the covering process STC should be consulted for the 
type of repair required for the damage incurred by the fabric 
covering. AC 43.13-1 also gives guidelines and acceptable 
practices for repairing cotton fabric, specifically when 
stitching is concerned. 

Often a large area that needs repair is judged in reference to 
the overall remaining lifespan of the fabric on the aircraft. For 
example, if the fabric has reached the limit of its durability, it 
is better to re-cover the entire aircraft than to replace a large 
damaged area when the remainder of the aircraft would soon 
need to be re-covered.

On aircraft with dope-based covering systems, continued 
shrinkage of the dope can cause the fabric to become too tight. 
Overly tight fabric may require the aircraft to be re-covered 
rather than repaired because excess tension on fabric can 
cause airframe structural damage. Loose fabric flaps in the 
wind during flight, affecting weight distribution and unduly 
stressing the airframe. It may also need to be replaced because 
of damage to the airframe. 

Another reason to re-cover rather than repair occurs when 
dope coatings on fabric develop cracks. These cracks could 
expose the fabric beneath to the elements that can weaken 
it. Close observation and field testing must be used to 
determine if the fabrics are airworthy. If not, the aircraft 
must be re-covered. If the fabric is airworthy and no other 
problems exist, a rejuvenator can be used per manufacturer’s 
instructions. This product is usually sprayed on and softens 
the coatings with very powerful solvents. Plasticizers in the 
rejuvenator become part of the film that fills in the cracks. 
After the rejuvenator dries, additional coats of aluminum-
pigmented dope must be added and then final topcoats applied 
to finish the job. While laborious, rejuvenating a dope finish 
over strong fabric can save a great deal of time and money. 
Polyurethane-based finishes cannot be rejuvenated.

Fabric Strength
Deterioration of the strength of the present fabric covering is 
the most common reason to re-cover an aircraft. The strength 
of fabric coverings must be determined at every 100-hour 
and annual inspection. Minimum fabric breaking strength is 
used to determine if an aircraft requires re-covering. 

Fabric strength is a major factor in the airworthiness of 
an aircraft. Fabric is considered to be airworthy until it 
deteriorates to a breaking strength less than 70 percent of 
the strength of the new fabric required for the aircraft. For 
example, if an aircraft was certificated with Grade-A cotton 
fabric that has a new breaking strength of 80 pounds, it 
becomes unairworthy when the fabric strength falls to 56 
pounds, which is 70 percent of 80 pounds. If polyester fabric, 
which has a higher new breaking strength, is used to re-cover 
this same aircraft, it would also need to exceed 56 pounds 
breaking strength to remain airworthy.


3-10

Fabric Performance Criteria

IF YOUR PERFORMANCE IS. . . FABRIC STRENGTH MUST BE. . . 

Loading TypeVNE Speed
New Breaking 

Strength
Minimum Breaking 

Strength

> 9 lb/sq ft

< 9 lb/sq ft

< 8 lb/sq ft

> 160 mph

< 160 mph

< 135 mph

≥ Grade A

≥ Intermediate

≥Lightweight

> 80 lb

> 65 lb

> 50 lb

> 56

> 46

> 35

Figure 3-10. Aircraft performance affects fabric selection.

In general, an aircraft is certified with a certain fabric based 
on its wing loading and its never exceed speed (VNE). The 
higher the wing loading and VNE, the stronger the fabric must 
be. On aircraft with wing loading of 9 pounds per square foot 
and over, or a VNE of 160 miles per hour (mph) or higher, 
fabric equaling or exceeding the strength of Grade A cotton is 
required. This means the new fabric breaking strength must be 
at least 80 pounds and the minimum fabric breaking strength 
at which the aircraft becomes unairworthy is 56 pounds.

On aircraft with wing loading of 9 pounds per square foot or 
less, or a VNE of 160 mph or less, fabric equaling or exceeding 
the strength of intermediate grade cotton is required. This 
means the new fabric breaking strength must be at least 65 
pounds and the minimum fabric breaking strength at which 
the aircraft becomes unairworthy is 46 pounds.

Lighter weight fabric may be found to have been certified on 
gliders or sailplanes and may be used on many uncertificated 
aircraft or aircraft in the Light Sport Aircraft (LSA) category. 
For aircraft with wing loading less than 8 pounds per square 
foot or less, or VNE of 135 mph or less, the fabric is considered 
unairworthy when the breaking strength has deteriorated to 
below 35 pounds (new minimum strength of 50 pounds). 
Figure 3-10 summarizes these parameters.

How Fabric Breaking Strength is Determined
Manufacturer’s instructions should always be consulted 
first for fabric strength inspection methodology. These 
instructions are approved data and may not require removal 
of a test strip to determine airworthiness of the fabric. In some 
cases, the manufacturer’s information does not include any 
fabric inspection methods. It may refer the IA to AC 43.13-
1, Chapter 2, Fabric Covering, which contains the approved 
FAA test strip method for breaking strength. 

The test strip method for the breaking strength of aircraft 
covering fabrics uses standards published by the American 
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) for the testing 
of various materials. Breaking strength is determined by 
cutting a 1¼ inch by 4–6 inch strip of fabric from the aircraft 

covering. This sample should be taken from an area that is 
exposed to the elements—usually an upper surface. It is also 
wise to take the sample from an area that has a dark colored 
finish since this has absorbed more of the sun’s UV rays 
and degraded faster. All coatings are then removed and the 
edges raveled to leave a 1-inch width. One end of the strip is 
clamped into a secured clamp and the other end is clamped 
such that a suitable container may be suspended from it. 
Weight is added to the container until the fabric breaks. The 
breaking strength of the fabric is equal to the weight of the 
lower clamp, the container, and the weight added to it. If the 
breaking strength is still in question, a sample should be sent 
to a qualified testing laboratory and breaking strength tests 
made in accordance with ASTM publication D5035. 

Note that the fabric test strip must have all coatings removed 
from it for the test. Soaking and cleaning the test strip in 
methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) usually removes all the coatings. 

Properly installed and maintained polyester fabric should 
give years of service before appreciable fabric strength 
degradation occurs. Aircraft owners often prefer not to 
have test strips cut out of the fabric, especially when the 
aircraft or the fabric covering is relatively new, because 
removal of a test strip damages the integrity of an airworthy 
component if the fabric passes. The test strip area then must 
be repaired, costing time and money. To avoid cutting a 
strip out of airworthy fabric, the IA makes a decision based 
on knowledge, experience, and available nondestructive 
techniques as to whether removal of a test strip is warranted 
to ensure that the aircraft can be returned to service.

An aircraft made airworthy under an STC is subject to the 
instructions for continued airworthiness in that STC. Most 
STCs refer to AC 43.13-1 for inspection methodology. Poly-
Fiber™ and Ceconite™ re-covering process STCs contain their 
own instructions and techniques for determining fabric strength 
and airworthiness. Therefore, an aircraft covered under those 
STCs may be inspected in accordance with this information. 
In most cases, the aircraft can be approved for return to service 
without cutting a strip from the fabric covering. 


3-11

80

70

60

50

40

30

75

65

55

45

35

25

M
A
U
L
E

M
a
u
le

 t
e
st

e
r

Red
Yellow
Green

Calibrated scale

S
e
yb

o
th

 o
r 

p
u
n
ch

 t
e
st

e
r

Fabric Fabric

Figure 3-11. Seyboth and Maule fabric strength testers.

The procedures in the Poly-Fiber™ and Ceconite™ STCs 
outlined in the following paragraphs are useful when inspecting 
any fabric covered aircraft as they add to the information 
gathered by the IA to determine the condition of the fabric. 
However, following these procedures alone on aircraft not re-
covered under these STCs does not make the aircraft airworthy. 
The IA must add his or her own knowledge, experience, and 
judgment to make a final determination of the strength of the 
fabric and whether it is airworthy.

Exposure to UV radiation appreciably reduces the strength of 
polyester fabric and forms the basis of the Poly-Fiber™ and 
Ceconite™ fabric evaluation process. All approved covering 
systems utilize fill coats applied to the fabric to protect it 
from UV. If installed according to the STC, these coatings 
should be sufficient to protect the fabric from the sun and 
should last indefinitely. Therefore, most of the evaluation 
of the strength of the fabric is actually an evaluation of the 
condition of its protective coating(s).

Upon a close visual inspection, the fabric coating(s) should 
be consistent, contain no cracks, and be flexible, not brittle. 
Pushing hard against the fabric with a knuckle should not 
damage the coating(s). It is recommended the inspector 
check in several areas, especially those most exposed to the 
sun. Coatings that pass this test can move to a simple test 
that determines whether or not UV light is passing through 
the coatings.

This test is based on the assumption that if visible light 
passes through the fabric coatings, then UV light can also. To 
verify whether or not visible light passes through the fabric 
coating, remove an inspection panel from the wing, fuselage, 
or empennage. Have someone hold an illuminated 60-watt 
lamp one foot away from the exterior of the fabric. No light 
should be visible through the fabric. If no light is visible, the 
fabric has not been weakened by UV rays and can be assumed 
to be airworthy. There is no need to perform the fabric strip 
strength test. If light is visible through the coatings, further 
investigation is required.

Fabric Testing Devices
Mechanical devices used to test fabric by pressing against 
or piercing the finished fabric are not FAA approved and 
are used at the discretion of the FAA-certificated mechanic 
to form an opinion on the general fabric condition. Punch 
test accuracy depends on the individual device calibration, 
total coating thickness, brittleness, and types of coatings 
and fabric. If the fabric tests in the lower breaking strength 
range with the mechanical punch tester or if the overall 
fabric cover conditions are poor, then more accurate field 
tests may be made.

The test should be performed on exposed fabric where there 
is a crack or chip in the coatings. If there is no crack or chip, 
coatings should be removed to expose the fabric wherever 
the test is to be done. 

The Maule punch tester, a spring-loaded device with its 
scale calibrated in breaking strength, tests fabric strength 
by pressing against it while the fabric is still on the aircraft. 
It roughly equates strength in pounds per square inch (psi) 
of resistance to breaking strength. The tester is pushed 
squarely against the fabric until the scale reads the amount 
of maximum allowable degradation. If the tester does 
not puncture the fabric, it may be considered airworthy. 
Punctures near the breaking strength should be followed 
with further testing, specifically the strip breaking strength 
test described above. Usually, a puncture indicates the fabric 
is in need of replacement.

A second type of punch tester, the Seyboth, is not as popular 
as the Maule because it punctures a small hole in the fabric 
when the mechanic pushes the shoulder of the testing unit 
against the fabric. A pin with a color-coded calibrated scale 
protrudes from the top of the tester and the mechanic reads 
this scale to determine fabric strength. Since this device 
requires a repair regardless of the strength of the fabric 
indicated, it is not widely used. 

Seyboth and Maule fabric strength testers designed for 
cotton- and linen-covered aircraft, not to be used on modern 
Dacron fabrics. Mechanical devices, combined with other 
information and experience, help the FAA-certificated 
mechanic judge the strength of the fabric. [Figure 3-11]


3-12

Figure 3-13. A custom-fit presewn fabric envelope is slid into 
position over a fuselage for the envelope method of fabric covering. 
Other than fitting, most steps in the covering process are the same 
as with the blanket covering method.

Figure 3-12. Laying out fabric during a blanket method re-covering 
job.

General Fabric Covering Process
It is required to have an IA involved in the process of re-
covering a fabric aircraft because re-covering is a major repair 
or major alteration. Signatures are required on FAA Form 
337 and in the aircraft logbook. To ensure work progresses 
as required, the IA should be involved from the beginning, 
as well as at various stages throughout the process. 

This section describes steps common to various STC and 
manufacturer covering processes, as well as the differences 
of some processes. To aid in proper performance of fabric 
covering and repair procedures, STC holders produce 
illustrated, step-by-step instructional manuals and videos that 
demonstrate the correct covering procedures. These training 
aids are invaluable to the inexperienced technician.

Since modern fabric coverings last indefinitely, a rare 
opportunity to inspect the aircraft exists during the re-
covering process. Inspectors and owner-operators should 
use this opportunity to perform a thorough inspection of the 
aircraft before new fabric is installed.

The method of fabric attachment should be identical, as far as 
strength and reliability are concerned, to the method used by 
the manufacturer of the aircraft being recovered or repaired. 
Carefully remove the old fabric from the airframe, noting the 
location of inspection covers, drain grommets, and method 
of attachment. Either the envelope method or blanket method 
of fabric covering is acceptable, but a choice must be made 
prior to beginning the re-covering process. 

Blanket Method vs. Envelope Method 
In the blanket method of re-covering, multiple flat sections 
of fabric are trimmed and attached to the airframe. Certified 
greige polyester fabric for covering an aircraft can be up to 
70 inches in width and used as it comes off the bolt. Each 
aircraft must be considered individually to determine the 
size and layout of blankets needed to cover it. A single 
blanket cut for each small surface (i.e., stabilizers and control 
surfaces) is common. Wings may require two blankets that 
overlap. Fuselages are covered with multiple blankets that 
span between major structural members, often with a single 
blanket for the bottom. Very large wings may require more 
than two blankets of fabric to cover the entire top and bottom 
surfaces. In all cases, the fabric is adhered to the airframe 
using the approved adhesives, following specific rules for the 
covering process being employed. [Figure 3-12]

An alternative method of re-covering, the envelope method, 
saves time by using precut and pre-sewn envelopes of fabric to 
cover the aircraft. The envelopes must be sewn with approved 
machine sewing thread, edge distance, fabric fold, etc., such 
as those specified in AC 43.13-1 or an STC. Patterns are 

made and fabric is cut and stitched so that each major surface, 
including the fuselage and wings, can be covered with a single, 
close-fitting envelope. Since envelopes are cut to fit, they are 
slid into position, oriented with the seams in the proper place, 
and attached with adhesive to the airframe. Envelope seams 
are usually located over airframe structure in inconspicuous 
places, such as the trailing edge structures and the very top and 
bottom of the fuselage, depending on airframe construction. 
Follow the manufacturer’s or STC’s instructions for proper 
location of the sewn seams of the envelope when using this 
method. [Figure 3-13]

Preparation for Fabric Covering Work
Proper preparation for re-covering a fabric aircraft is 
essential. First, assemble the materials and tools required to 
complete the job. The holder of the STC usually supplies a 
materials and tools list either separately or in the STC manual. 
Control of temperature, humidity, and ventilation is needed 
in the work environment. If ideal environmental conditions 
cannot be met, additives are available that compensate for 
this for most re-covering products. 


3-13

Rotating stand and sawhorseRotatable wood stand and sawhorse

Storage area

Work area with rotating stands
Tool
cart

Fire extinguisher

E
xh

a
u

st
 f

a
n

Fabric rack

Work bench
Shelving

Hazardous 
material storage

Wash basin/water
emergency supplies+

−
PWR

FNCN

SEL

VOL BATT

Thermometer

Figure 3-15. Some components of a work area for covering an aircraft with fabric.

Figure 3-14. Rotating stands and sawhorses facilitate easy access to top and bottom surfaces during the fabric covering process. 

Rotating work stands for the fuselage and wings provide 
easy, alternating access to the upper and lower surfaces 
while the job is in progress. [Figure 3-14] They can be 
used with sawhorses or sawhorses can be used alone to 
support the aircraft structure while working. A workbench 
or table, as well as a rolling cart and storage cabinet, are also 
recommended. Figure 3-15 shows a well conceived fabric 
covering workshop. A paint spray booth for sprayed-on 
coatings and space to store components awaiting work is 
also recommended. 

Many of the substances used in most re-covering processes 
are highly toxic. Proper protection must be used to avoid 
serious short- and long-term adverse health effects. Eye 

protection, a proper respirator, and skin protection are 
vital. As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, nitrate 
dope is very flammable. Proper ventilation and a rated fire 
extinguisher should be on hand when working with this and 
other covering process materials. Grounding of work to 
prevent static electricity build-up may be required. All fabric 
re-covering processes also involve multiple coats of various 
products that are sprayed onto the fabric surface. Use of a 
high-volume, low-pressure (HVLP) sprayer is recommended. 
Good ventilation is needed for all of the processes.


3-14

Gently roll the fabric back as the cut is made.

Carefully cut away the fabric.

Figure 3-16. Old fabric coverings are cut off in large pieces to preserve them as templates for locating various airframe features. Sharp 
blades and care must be used to avoid damaging the structure.

Removal of Old Fabric Coverings
Removal of the old covering is the first step in replacing 
an aircraft fabric covering. Cut away the old fabric from 
the airframe with razor blades or utility knife. Care should 
be taken to ensure that no damage is done to the airframe. 
[Figure 3-16] To use the old covering for templates in 
transferring the location of inspection panels, cable guides, 
and other features to the new covering, the old covering 
should be removed in large sections. NOTE: any rib stitching 
fasteners, if used to attach the fabric to the structure, should 
be removed before the fabric is pulled free of the airframe. If 
fasteners are left in place, damage to the structure may occur 
during fabric removal. 

Preparation of the Airframe Before Covering
Once the old fabric has been removed, the exposed airframe 
structure must be thoroughly cleaned and inspected. The 
IA collaborating on the job should be involved in this step 
of the process. Details of the inspection should follow the 
manufacturer’s guidelines, the STC, or AC 43.13-1. All 
of the old adhesive must be completely removed from the 
airframe with solvent, such as MEK. A thorough inspection 
must be done and various components may be selected to be 
removed for cleaning, inspection, and testing. Any repairs 
that are required, including the removal and treatment of all 
corrosion, must be done at this time. If the airframe is steel 

tubing, many technicians take the opportunity to grit blast 
the entire airframe at this stage.

The leading edge of a wing is a critical area where airflow 
diverges and begins its laminar flow over the wing’s surfaces, 
which results in the generation of lift. It is beneficial to have 
a smooth, regular surface in this area. Plywood leading edges 
must be sanded until smooth, bare wood is exposed. If oil 
or grease spots exist, they must be cleaned with naphtha or 
other specified cleaners. If there are any chips, indentations, 
or irregularities, approved filler may be spread into these 
areas and sanded smooth. The entire leading edge should be 
cleaned before beginning the fabric covering process. 

To obtain a smooth finish on fabric-covered leading edges 
of aluminum wings, a sheet of felt or polyester padding may 
be applied before the fabric is installed. This should only be 
done with the material specified in the STC under which 
the technician is working. The approved padding ensures 
compatibility with the adhesives and first coatings of the 
covering process. When a leading edge pad is used, check the 
STC process instructions for permission to make a cemented 
fabric seam over the padding. [Figure 3-17]

When completely cleaned, inspected, and repaired, an 
approved primer, or varnish if it is a wood structure, should 
be applied to the airframe. This step is sometimes referred 


3-15

Figure 3-19. Inter-rib bracing holds the ribs in place during the 
re-covering process.

Figure 3-18. Anti-chafe tape is applied to all features that might 
cut or wear through the fabric. 

Figure 3-17. The use of specified felt or padding over the wing 
leading edges before the fabric is installed results in a smooth 
regular surface.

to as dope proofing. Exposed aluminum must first be acid 
etched. Use the product(s) specified by the manufacturer 
or in the STC to prepare the metal before priming. Two 
part epoxy primers and varnishes, which are not affected 
by the fabric adhesive and subsequent coatings, are usually 
specified. One part primers, such as zinc chromate and spar 
varnish, are typically not acceptable. The chemicals in the 
adhesives dissolve the primers, and adhesion of the fabric 
to the airframe is lost. 
 
Sharp edges, metal seams, the heads of rivets, and any 
other feature on the aircraft structure that might cut or wear 
through the fabric should be covered with anti-chafe tape. As  
described above, this cloth sticky-back tape is approved and 
should not be substituted with masking or any other kind of 
tape. Sometimes, rib cap strips need to have anti-chafe tape 
applied when the edges are not rounded over. [Figure 3-18]

Inter-rib bracing must also be accomplished before the fabric 
is installed. It normally does not have an adhesive attached to 
it and is wrapped only once around each rib. The single wrap 
around each rib is enough to hold the ribs in place during 
the covering process but allows small movements during the 
fabric shrinking process. [Figure 3-19]


3-16

Top fabric

Bottom fabric

Top fabric

Bottom fabric

2" typical overlap on the leading edge

2" typical overlap on the leading edge

1" typical overlap on the trailing edge

1" typical overlap on the trailing edge

Fabric overlap covering a low wing aircraft

Fabric overlap covering a high wing aircraft

Figure 3-20. For appearance, fabric can be overlapped differently on high wing and low wing aircraft. 

Attaching Polyester Fabric to the Airframe
Inexperienced technicians are encouraged to construct a 
test panel upon which they can practice with the fabric and 
various substances and techniques to be used on the aircraft. 
It is often suggested to cover smaller surfaces first, such as 
the empennage and control surfaces. Mistakes on these can 
be corrected and are less costly if they occur. The techniques 
employed for all surfaces, including the wings and fuselage, 
are basically the same. Once dexterity has been established, 
the order in which one proceeds is often a personal choice.

When the airframe is primed and ready for fabric installation, 
it must receive a final inspection by an A&P with IA.  
When approved, attachment of the fabric may begin. The 
manufacturer’s or STC’s instructions must be followed 
without deviation for the job to be airworthy. The following 
are the general steps taken. Each approved process has its 
own nuances. 

Seams
During installation, the fabric is overlapped and seamed 
together. Primary concerns for fabric seams are strength, 
elasticity, durability, and good appearance. Whether using the 
blanket method or envelope method, position all fabric seams 
over airframe structure to which the fabric is to be adhered 
during the covering process, whenever possible. Unlike the 
blanket method, fabric seam overlap is predetermined in the 
envelope method. Seams sewn to the specifications in AC 
43.13-1, the STC under which the work is being performed, 
or the manufacturer’s instructions should perform adequately. 

Most covering procedures for polyester fabric rely on doped 
or glued seams as opposed to sewn seams. They are simple 
and easy to make and provide excellent strength, elasticity, 
durability, and appearance. When using the blanket method, 
seam overlap is specified in the covering instructions and 
the FAA-certificated A&P mechanic must adhere to these 
specifications. Typically, a minimum of two to four inches 
of fabric overlap seam is required where ends of fabric are 
joined in areas of critical airflow, such as the leading edge of 
a wing. One to two inches of overlap is often the minimum 
in other areas. 

When using the blanket method, options exist for deciding 
where to overlap the fabric for coverage. Function and the 
final appearance of the covering job should be considered. 
For example, fabric seams made on the wing’s top surface 
of a high wing aircraft are not visible when approaching the 
aircraft. Seams on low wing aircraft and many horizontal 
stabilizers are usually made on the bottom of the wing for 
the same reason. [Figure 3-20]

Fabric Cement
A polyester fabric covering is cemented or glued to the 
airframe structure at all points where it makes contact. Special 
formula adhesives have replaced nitrate dope for adhesion 
in most covering processes. The adhesive (as well as all 
subsequent coating materials) should be mixed for optimum 
characteristics at the temperature at which the work is being 
performed. Follow the manufacturer’s or STC’s guidance 
when mixing.


3-17

1 Begin on one end

2 Move to the opposite side3 Swit
ch from

 side to
 side

4 End in the middle

Figure 3-22. An example of a wing fabric ironing procedure designed to evenly taughten the fabric.

Figure 3-21. Irons used during the fabric covering process. 

To attach the fabric to the airframe, first pre-apply two 
coats of adhesive to the structure at all points the fabric is 
to contact it. (It is important to follow the manufacturer’s or 
STC’s guidance as all systems are different.) Allow these to 
dry. The fabric is then spread over the surface and clamped 
into position. It should not be pulled tighter than the relaxed 
but not wrinkled condition it assumes when lying on the 
structure. Clamps or clothespins are used to attach the fabric 
completely around the perimeter. The Stewart System STC 
does not need clamps because the glue assumes a tacky 
condition when precoated and dried. There is sufficient 
adhesion in the precoat to position the fabric. 

The fabric should be positioned in all areas before undertaking 
final adhesion. Final adhesion often involves lifting the  
fabric, applying a wet bed of cement, and pressing the fabric 
into the bed. An additional coat of cement over the top of 
the fabric is common. Depending on the process, wrinkles 
and excess cement are smoothed out with a squeegee or are 
ironed out. The Stewart System calls for heat activation of 
the cement precoats through the fabric with an iron while 
the fabric is in place. Follow the approved instructions for 
the covering method being used.

Fabric Heat Shrinking
Once the fabric has been glued to the structure, it can be 
made taut by heat shrinking. This process is done with an 
ordinary household iron that the technician calibrates before 
use. A smaller iron is also used to iron in small or tight places. 
[Figure 3-21] The iron is run over the entire surface of the 
fabric. Follow the instructions for the work being performed. 

Some processes avoid ironing seams while other processes 
begin ironing over structure and move to spanned fabric or 
vice-versa. It is important to shrink the fabric evenly. Starting 
on one end of a structure and progressing sequentially to the 
other end is not recommended. Skipping from one end to the 
other, and then to the middle, is more likely to evenly draw 
the fabric tight. [Figure 3-22]


3-18

Figure 3-24. A premarked location for a lacing hole, which is 
punched through the fabric with a pencil. 

Figure 3-23. Reinforcing tape the same width as the wing ribs is 
applied over all wing ribs.

The amount polyester fabric shrinks is directly related to 
the temperature applied. Polyester fabric can shrink nearly 
5 percent at 250 °F and 10 percent at 350 °F. It is customary 
to shrink the fabric in stages, using a lower temperature first, 
before finishing with the final temperature setting. The first 
shrinking is used to remove wrinkles and excess fabric. The 
final shrinking gives the finished tautness desired. Each 
process has its own temperature regime for the stages of 
tautening. Typically ranging from 225 °F to 350 °F, it is 
imperative to follow the process instructions. Not all fabric 
covering processes use the same temperature range and 
maximum temperature. Ensure irons are calibrated to prevent 
damage at high temperature settings.

Attaching Fabric to the Wing Ribs
Once the fabric has been tautened, covering processes vary. 
Some require a sealing coat be applied to the fabric at this 
point. It is usually put on by brush to ensure the fibers are 
saturated. Other processes seal the fabric later. Whatever 
the process, the fabric on wings must be secured to the wing 
ribs with more than just cement. The forces caused by the 
airflow over the wings are too great for cement alone to hold 
the fabric in place. As described in the materials section, 
screws, rivets, clips and lacing hold the fabric in place on 
manufactured aircraft. Use the same attach method as used by 
the original aircraft manufacturer. Deviation requires a field 
approval. Note that fuselage and empennage attachments 
may be used on some aircraft. Follow the methodology for 
wing rib lacing described below and the manufacturer’s 
instructions for attach point locations and any possible 
variations to what is presented here.

Care must always be taken to identify and eliminate any sharp 
edges that might wear through the fabric. Reinforcing tape of 
the exact same width as the rib cap is installed before any of 

the fasteners. This approved sticky-back tape helps prevent 
the fabric from tearing. [Figure 3-23] Then, screws, rivets, 
and clips simply attach into the predrilled holes in the rib caps 
to hold the fabric to the caps. Rib lacing is a more involved 
process whereby the fabric is attached to the ribs with cord.

Rib Lacing
There are two kinds of rib lacing cord. One has a round 
cross-section and the other flat. Which to use is a matter 
of preference based on ease of use and final appearance. 
Only approved rib lacing cord can be used. Unless a rib is 
unusually deep from top to bottom, rib lacing uses a single 
length of cord that passes completely through the wing from 
the upper surface to the lower surface thereby attaching the 
top and bottom skin to the rib simultaneously. 

Holes are laid out and pre-punched through the skin as 
close to the rib caps as possible to accept the lacing cord. 
[Figure 3-24] This minimizes leverage the fabric could 
develop while trying to pull away from the structure and 
prevents tearing. The location of the holes is not arbitrary. 
The spacing between lacing holes and knots must adhere 
to manufacturer’s instructions, if available. STC lacing 
guidance refers to manufacturer’s instructions or to that 
shown on the chart in Figure 3-25 which is taken from AC 
43.13-1. Notice that because of greater turbulence in the area 
of the propeller wash, closer spacing between the lacing is 
required there. This slipstream is considered to be the width 
of the propeller plus one additional rib. Ribs are normally 
laced from the leading edge to the trailing edge of the wing. 
Rib lacing is done with a long curved needle to guide the 
cord in and out of holes and through the depth of the rib. 
The knots are designed not to slip under the forces applied 
and can be made in a series out of a single strand of lacing. 
Stitching can begin at the leading edge or trailing edge. A 


3-19

Aircraft Velocity Never Exceed  Speed (VNE)/(Miles Per Hour)

M
a
xi

m
u
m

 S
p
a
ci

n
g
 o

f 
R

ib
 L

a
ci

n
g
 (

In
ch

e
s)

100               150              200             250              300

4

3

2

1

Spacing other than in slipstream (non-prop wash area)

Spacing in slipstream (prop wash area)

Tape

Half hitch

Rib cap

Fabric

Square
knot

Figure 3-26. A starter knot for rib lacing can be a square knot with 
a half hitch on each side.

Figure 3-25. A rib lacing spacing chart. Unless manufacturer data specifies otherwise, use the spacing indicated. 

square knot with a half hitch on each side is typically used 
for the first knot when lacing a rib. [Figure 3-26] This is 
followed by a series of modified seine knots until the final 
knot is made and secured with a half hitch. [Figure 3-27] 
Hidden modified seine knots are also used. These knots are 
placed below the fabric surface so only a single strand of 
lacing is visible across the rib cap. [Figure 3-28] 

Structure and accessories within the wing may prevent a 
continuous lacing. Ending the lacing and beginning again 
can avoid these obstacles. Lacing that is not long enough to 
complete the rib may be ended and a new starting knot can 
be initiated at the next set of holes. The lacing can also be 
extended by joining it with another piece of lacing using the 
splice knot shown in Figure 3-29.


3-20

AF
T

Starting stitch

Wing
 lead

ing e
dge f

airing

Capstrip

Reinforcing tape (should be same width as the rib)

Modifield seine knot

Capstrip

Reinforcing tape
(should be same
width as the rib)

Single loop lacing

S

S

S/2

S = Normal stitch spacing

Pull tight

Push knot under fabric

1 2 3 4
Pull to

tighten

Pull to

tighten

LoadLoad

Knot completed

Knot formed but not tightened

Figure 3-29. The splice knot can be used to join two pieces of rib 
lacing cord.

Figure 3-28. Hiding rib lacing knots below the fabric surface results 
in a smooth surface.

Figure 3-27. In this example of rib lacing, modified seine knots are used and shown above the fabric surface. Hidden modified seine 
knots are common. They are made so that the knots are pushed or pulled below the fabric surface.

Occasionally, lacing to just the rib cap is employed without 
lacing entirely through the wing and incorporating the cap on 
the opposite side. This is done where ribs are exceptionally 
deep or where through lacing is not possible, such as in an 
area where a fuel tank is installed. Changing to a needle with 
a tighter radius facilitates threading the lacing cord in these 
areas. Knotting procedures remain unchanged.


3-21

Figure 3-31. Drain grommets cemented into place on the bottom 
side of a control surface. 

Figure 3-30. This inspection ring was cemented into place on the 
fabric covering. The approved technique specifies the use of a fabric 
overlay that is cemented over the ring and to the fabric. 

Technicians inexperienced at rib lacing should seek assistance 
to ensure the correct knots are being tied. STC holder videos 
are invaluable in this area. They present repeated close-up 
visual instruction and guidance to ensure airworthy lacing. 
AC 43.13-1, Chapter 2, Fabric Covering, also has in-depth 
instructions and diagrams as do some manufacturer’s manuals 
and STC’s instructions.

Rings, Grommets, and Gussets 
When the ribs are laced and the fabric covering completely 
attached, the various inspection rings, drain grommets, 
reinforcing patches, and finishing tapes are applied. Inspection 
rings aid access to critical areas of the structure (pulleys, bell 
cranks, drag/anti-drag wires, etc.) once the fabric skin is in 
place. They are plastic or aluminum and normally cemented 
to the fabric using the approved cement and procedures. The 
area inside the ring is left intact. It is removed only when 
inspection or maintenance requires access through that ring. 
Once removed, preformed inspection panels are used to close 
the opening. The rings should be positioned as specified by 
the manufacturer. Lacking that information, they should be 
positioned as they were on the previous covering fabric. 
Additional rings should be installed by the technician if it is 
determined a certain area would benefit from access in the 
future. [Figure 3-30]

Water from rain and condensation can collect under the fabric 
covering and needs a way to escape. Drain grommets serve 
this purpose. There are a few different types as described in 
the materials section above. All are cemented into position 
in accordance with the approved process under which the 
work is being performed. Locations for the drain grommets 
should be ascertained from manufacturer’s data. If not 
specified, AC 43.13-1 has acceptable location information. 
Each fabric covering STC may also give recommendations. 

Typically, drain grommets are located at the lowest part 
of each area of the structure (e.g., bottom of the fuselage, 
wings, empennage). [Figure 3-31] Each rib bay of the wings 
is usually drained with one or two grommets on the bottom 
of the trailing edge. Note that drain holes without grommets 
are sometimes approved in reinforced fabric. 

It is possible that additional inspection rings and drain 
grommets have been specified after the manufacture of the 

aircraft. Check the Airworthiness Directives (ADs) and 
Service Bulletins for the aircraft being re-covered to ensure 
required rings and grommets have been installed. 

Cable guide openings, strut-attach fitting areas, and similar 
features, as well as any protrusions in the fabric covering, are 
reinforced with fabric gussets. These are installed as patches 
in the desired location. They should be cut to fit exactly 
around the feature they reinforce to support the original 
opening made in the covering fabric. [Figure 3-32] Gussets 
made to keep protrusions from coming through the fabric 
should overlap the area they protect. Most processes call for 
the gusset material to be preshrunk and cemented into place 
using the approved covering process cementing procedures. 

Finishing Tapes
Finishing tapes are applied to all seams, edges, and over the 
ribs once all of the procedures above have been completed. 
They are used to protect these areas by providing smooth 
aerodynamic resistance to abrasion. The tapes are made from 
the same polyester material as the covering fabric. Use of 
lighter weight tapes is approved in some STCs. Preshrunk 
tapes are preferred because they react to exposure to the 
environment in the same way the as the fabric covering. 
This minimizes stress on the adhesive joint between the two. 


3-22

Figure 3-33. Cement is brushed through a four-inch tape during 
installation over the fabric seam on a wing leading edge. Two-inch 
tapes cover the wing ribs and rib lacing.

Figure 3-32. A strut fitting and cable guide with reinforcing fabric 
gussets cemented in place. 

Straight edged and pinked tapes are available. The pinking 
provides greater surface area for adhesion of the edges and 
a smoother transition into the fabric covering. Only tapes 
approved in the STC under which work is being accomplished 
may be used to be considered airworthy. 

Finishing tapes from one to six inches in width are used. 
Typically, two inch tapes cover the rib lacing and fuselage 
seams. Wing leading edges usually receive the widest tape 
with four inches being common. [Figure 3-33] Bias cut tapes 
are often used to wrap around the curved surfaces of the 
airframe, such as the wing tips and empennage surface edges. 
They lay flat around the curves and do not require notching. 
Finishing tapes are attached with the process adhesive or 
the nitrate dope sealer when using a dope-based process. 
Generally, all chordwise tapes are applied first followed by 
the span-wise tapes at the leading and trailing edges. Follow 
the manufacturer’s STC or AC 43.13-1 instructions.
 
Coating the Fabric
The sealer coat in most fabric covering processes is applied 
after all finishing tapes have been installed unless it was 
applied prior to rib lacing as in a dope-based finishing 
process. This coat saturates and completely surrounds the 

fibers in the polyester fabric, forming a barrier that keeps 
water and contaminants from reaching the fabric during 
its life. It is also used to provide adhesion of subsequent 
coatings. Usually brushed on in a cross coat application for 
thorough penetration, two coats of sealer are commonly used 
but processes vary on how many coats and whether spray 
coating is permitted.

With the sealer coats installed and dried, the next step 
provides protection from UV light, the only significant cause 
of deterioration of polyester fabric. Designed to prevent UV 
light from reaching the fabric and extend the life of the fabric 
indefinitely, these coating products, or fill coats, contain 
aluminum solids premixed into them that block the UV rays. 
They are sprayed on in the number of cross coats as specified 
in the manufacturer’s STC or AC 43.13-1 instructions under 
which work is done. Two to four cross coats is common. 
Note that some processes may require coats of clear butyrate 
before the blocking formula is applied. 

Fabric primer is a coating used in some approved covering 
processes that combines the sealer and fill coatings into one. 
Applied to fabric after the finishing tapes are installed, these 
fabric primers surround and seal the fabric fibers, provide 
good adhesion for all of the following coatings, and contain 
UV blocking agents. One modern primer contains carbon 
solids and others use chemicals that work similarly to sun 
block for human skin. Typically, two to four coats of fabric 
primer are sufficient before the top coatings of the final finish 
are applied. [Figure 3-34]

The FAA-certificated mechanic must strictly adhere to all 
instructions for thinning, drying times, sanding, and cleaning. 
Small differences in the various processes exist and what 
works in one process may not be acceptable and could ruin 


3-23

Figure 3-34. Applying a primer with UV blocking by spraying 
cross coats.

the finish of another process. STCs are issued on the basis 
of the holder having successfully proven the effectiveness of 
both the materials and the techniques involved. 

When the fill coats have been applied, the final appearance 
of the fabric covering job is crafted with the application 
of various topcoats. Due to the chemical nature of the fill 
coating upon which topcoats are sprayed, only specified 
materials can be used for top coating to ensure compatibility. 
Colored butyrate dope and polyurethane paint finishes are 
most common. They are sprayed on according to instructions. 

Once the topcoats are dry, the trim (N numbers, stripes, 
etc.) can be added. Strict observation of drying times and 
instructions for buffing and waxing are critical to the quality 
of the final finish. Also, note that STC instructions may 
include insight on finishing the nonfabric portions of the 
airframe to best match the fabric covering finish. 

Polyester Fabric Repairs 
Applicable Instructions
Repairs to aircraft fabric coverings are inevitable. Always 
inspect a damaged area to ensure the damage is confined 
to the fabric and does not involve the structure below. A 
technician who needs to make a fabric repair must first 
identify which approved data was used to install the covering 
that needs to be repaired. Consult the logbook where an 
entry and reference to manufacturer data, an STC, or a field 
approval possibly utilizing practices from AC 43.13-1 should 
be recorded. The source of approved data for the covering 
job is the same source of approved data used for a repair. 

This section discusses general information concerning repairs 
to polyester fabric. Thorough instructions for repairs made to 
cotton covered aircraft can be found in AC 43.13-1. It is the 
responsibility of the holder of an STC to provide maintenance 
instructions for the STC alteration in addition to materials 
specifications required to do the job. 

Repair Considerations
The type of repair performed depends on the extent of the 
damage and the process under which the fabric was installed. 
The size of the damaged area is often a reference for whether 
a patch is sufficient to do the repair or whether a new panel 
should be installed. Repair size may also dictate the amount of 
fabric-to-fabric overlap required when patching and whether 
finishing tapes are required over the patch. Many STC repair 
procedures do not require finishing tapes. Some repairs in 
AC 43.13-1 require the use of tape up to six inches wide.

While many cotton fabric repairs involve sewing, nearly 
all repairs of polyester fabric are made without sewing. It 
is possible to apply the sewing repair techniques outlined 
in AC 43.13-1 to polyester fabric, but they were developed 
primarily for cotton and linen fabrics. STC instructions for 
repairs to polyester fabric are for cemented repairs which 
most technicians prefer as they are generally considered 
easier than sewn repairs. There is no compromise to the 
strength of the fabric with either method.

Patching or replacing a section of the covering requires 
prepping the fabric area around the damage where new 
fabric is to be attached. Procedures vary widely. Dope-based 
covering systems tend toward stripping off all coatings to 
cement raw fabric to raw fabric when patching or seaming 
in a new panel. From this point, the coatings are reapplied 
and finished as in the original covering process. Some 
polyurethane-based coating processes require only a scuffing 
of the topcoat with sandpaper before adhering small patches 
that are then refinished. [Figure 3-35] Still, other processes 
may remove the topcoats and cement a patch into the sealer 
or UV blocking coating. In some repair processes, preshrunk 
fabric is used and in others, the fabric is shrunk after it is in 
place. Varying techniques and temperatures for shrinking 
and gluing the fabric into a repair also exist. 

These deviations in procedures underscore the critical nature 
of identifying and strictly adhering to the correct instructions 
from the approved data for the fabric covering in need of 
repair. A patch or panel replacement technique for one 
covering system could easily create an unairworthy repair 
if used on fabric installed with a different covering process. 


3-24

Figure 3-35. A patch over this small hole on a polyurethane top coat is repaired in accordance with the repair instructions in the STC 
under which the aircraft was re-covered. It requires only a two-inch fabric overlap and scuffing into the top coat before cementing and 
refinishing. Other STC repair instructions may not allow this repair. 

Large section panel repairs use the same proprietary adhesives 
and techniques and are only found in the instructions for 
the process used to install the fabric covering. A common 
technique for replacing any large damaged area is to replace 
all of the fabric between two adjacent structural members 
(e.g., two ribs, two longerons, between the forward and rear 
spars). Note that this is a major repair and carries with it the 
requirement to file an FAA Form 337.

Cotton-Covered Aircraft
You may encounter a cotton fabric-covered aircraft. In 
addition to other airworthiness criterion, the condition of the 
fabric under the finished surface is paramount as the cotton 
can deteriorate even while the aircraft is stored in a hangar. 
Inspection, in accordance with the manufacturer maintenance 
manual or AC 43.13-1, should be diligent. If the cotton 
covering is found to be airworthy, repairs to the fabric can 
be made under those specifications. This includes sewn-in 
and doped-in patches, as well as sewn-in and doped-in panel 
repairs. Due to the very limited number of airworthy aircraft 
that may still be covered with cotton, this handbook does 
not cover specific information on re-covering with cotton 

or cotton fabric maintenance and repair procedures. Refer to 
AC 43.13-1, Chapter 2, Fabric Covering, which thoroughly 
addresses these issues. 

Fiberglass Coverings
References to fiberglass surfaces in aircraft covering STCs, 
AC 43.13-1, and other maintenance literature address 
techniques for finishing and maintaining this kind of surface. 
However, this is typically limited to fiberglass radomes and 
fiberglass reinforced plywood surfaces and parts that are 
still in service. Use of dope-based processes on fiberglass 
is well established. Repair and apply coatings and finishes 
on fiberglass in accordance with manufacturer data, STC 
instructions, or AC 43.13-1 acceptable practices. Mildew, 
moisture, chemicals, or acids have no effect on glass fabric 
when used as a structure material. For more information on 
glass fabric, refer to AC 43.13-1(as revised).

