
4-1

Chapter 4

Aircraft Metal Structural Repair
Aircraft Metal Structural Repair
The satisfactory performance of an aircraft requires continuous 
maintenance of aircraft structural integrity. It is important that 
metal structural repairs be made according to the best available 
techniques because improper repair techniques can pose an 
immediate or potential danger. The reliability of an aircraft 
depends on the quality of the design, as well as the workmanship 
used in making the repairs. The design of an aircraft metal 
structural repair is complicated by the requirement that an aircraft 
be as light as possible. If weight were not a critical factor, repairs 
could be made with a large margin of safety. In actual practice, 
repairs must be strong enough to carry all of the loads with the 
required factor of safety, but they must not have too much extra 
strength. For example, a joint that is too weak cannot be tolerated, 
but a joint that is too strong can create stress risers that may cause 
cracks in other locations. 

As discussed in Chapter 3, Aircraft Fabric Covering, sheet metal 
aircraft construction dominates modern aviation. Generally, sheet 
metal made of aluminum alloys is used in airframe sections that 
serve as both the structure and outer aircraft covering, with the 
metal parts joined with rivets or other types of fasteners. Sheet 
metal is used extensively in many types of aircraft from airliners 
to single engine airplanes, but it may also appear as part of a 
composite airplane, such as in an instrument panel. Sheet metal 
is obtained by rolling metal into flat sheets of various thicknesses 
ranging from thin (leaf) to plate (pieces thicker than 6 mm or 0.25 
inch). The thickness of sheet metal, called gauge, ranges from 8 
to 30 with the higher gauge denoting thinner metal. Sheet metal 
can be cut and bent into a variety of shapes. 


4-2

Damage to metal aircraft structures is often caused by 
corrosion, erosion, normal stress, and accidents and mishaps. 
Sometimes aircraft structure modifications require extensive 
structural rework. For example, the installation of winglets 
on aircraft not only replaces a wing tip with a winglet, but 
also requires extensive reinforcing of the wing structure to 
carry additional stresses. 

Numerous and varied methods of repairing metal structural 
portions of an aircraft exist, but no set of specific repair 
patterns applies in all cases. The problem of repairing a 
damaged section is usually solved by duplicating the original 
part in strength, kind of material, and dimensions. To make a 
structural repair, the aircraft technician needs a good working 
knowledge of sheet metal forming methods and techniques. In 
general, forming means changing the shape by bending and 
forming solid metal. In the case of aluminum, this is usually 
done at room temperature. All repair parts are shaped to fit 
in place before they are attached to the aircraft or component. 

Forming may be a very simple operation, such as making 
a single bend or a single curve, or it may be a complex 
operation, requiring a compound curvature. Before forming 
a part, the aircraft technician must give some thought to 
the complexity of the bends, the material type, the material 
thickness, the material temper, and the size of the part being 
fabricated. In most cases, these factors determine which 
forming method to use. Types of forming discussed in this 
chapter include bending, brake forming, stretch forming, roll 
forming, and spinning. The aircraft technician also needs 
a working knowledge of the proper use of the tools and 
equipment used in forming metal.

In addition to forming techniques, this chapter introduces 
the airframe technician to the tools used in sheet metal 
construction and repair, structural fasteners and their 
installation, how to inspect, classify, and assess metal 
structural damage, common repair practices, and types of 
repairs. 

The repairs discussed in this chapter are typical of those used 
in aircraft maintenance and are included to introduce some of 
the operations involved. For exact information about specific 
repairs, consult the manufacturer’s maintenance or structural 
repair manuals (SRM). General repair instructions are also 
discussed in Advisory Circular (AC) 43.13.1, Acceptable 
Methods, Techniques, and Practices—Aircraft Inspection 
and Repair.

Stresses in Structural Members
An aircraft structure must be designed so that it accepts all of 
the stresses imposed upon it by the flight and ground loads 
without any permanent deformation. Any repair made must 

accept the stresses, carry them across the repair, and then 
transfer them back into the original structure. These stresses 
are considered as flowing through the structure, so there 
must be a continuous path for them, with no abrupt changes 
in cross-sectional areas along the way. Abrupt changes in 
cross-sectional areas of aircraft structure that are subject to 
cycle loading or stresses result in a stress concentration that 
may induce fatigue cracking and eventual failure. A scratch or 
gouge in the surface of a highly stressed piece of metal causes 
a stress concentration at the point of damage and could lead 
to failure of the part. Forces acting on an aircraft, whether it 
is on the ground or in flight, introduce pulling, pushing, or 
twisting forces within the various members of the aircraft 
structure. While the aircraft is on the ground, the weight of 
the wings, fuselage, engines, and empennage causes forces 
to act downward on the wing and stabilizer tips, along the 
spars and stringers, and on the bulkheads and formers. These 
forces are passed from member to member causing bending, 
twisting, pulling, compression, and shearing forces.

As the aircraft takes off, most of the forces in the fuselage 
continue to act in the same direction; because of the motion 
of the aircraft, they increase in intensity. The forces on the 
wingtips and the wing surfaces, however, reverse direction; 
instead of being downward forces of weight, they become 
upward forces of lift. The forces of lift are exerted first 
against the skin and stringers, then are passed on to the ribs, 
and finally are transmitted through the spars to be distributed 
through the fuselage. The wings bend upward at their ends 
and may flutter slightly during flight. This wing bending 
cannot be ignored by the manufacturer in the original design 
and construction and cannot be ignored during maintenance. 
It is surprising how an aircraft structure composed of 
structural members and skin rigidly riveted or bolted together, 
such as a wing, can bend or act so much like a leaf spring.

The six types of stress in an aircraft are described as tension, 
compression, shear, bearing, bending, and torsion (or 
twisting). The first four are commonly called basic stresses; 
the last two, combination stresses. Stresses usually act in 
combinations rather than singly. [Figure 4-1]

Tension
Tension is the stress that resists a force that tends to pull apart. 
The engine pulls the aircraft forward, but air resistance tries 
to hold it back. The result is tension, which tends to stretch 
the aircraft. The tensile strength of a material is measured in 
pounds per square inch (psi) and is calculated by dividing 
the load (in pounds) required to pull the material apart by its 
cross-sectional area (in square inches).

The strength of a member in tension is determined on 
the basis of its gross area (or total area), but calculations  


4-3

Compression

Tension

E. Bending

A. Tension

B. Compression

C. Torsion

D. Shear

Rivets

Top sheet is bearing against 
the bottom sheet. Fasteners 
are pressing top sheet against 
bottom sheet.

The force that 
tries to pull the 
two sheets apart

B
e
a
ri
n
g
 s

tr
e
ss

Figure 4-1. Stresses in aircraft structures. 

Figure 4-2. Bearing stress.

involving tension must take into consideration the net area of 
the member. Net area is defined as the gross area minus that 
removed by drilling holes or by making other changes in the 
section. Placing rivets or bolts in holes makes no appreciable 
difference in added strength, as the rivets or bolts will not 
transfer tensional loads across holes in which they are inserted. 

Compression
Compression, the stress that resists a crushing force, tends to 
shorten or squeeze aircraft parts. The compressive strength of 
a material is also measured in psi. Under a compressive load, 
an undrilled member is stronger than an identical member 
with holes drilled through it. However, if a plug of equivalent 
or stronger material is fitted tightly in a drilled member, it 
transfers compressive loads across the hole, and the member 
carries approximately as large a load as if the hole were not 
there. Thus, for compressive loads, the gross or total area may 
be used in determining the stress in a member if all holes are 
tightly plugged with equivalent or stronger material. 

Shear
Shear is the stress that resists the force tending to cause one 
layer of a material to slide over an adjacent layer. Two riveted
plates in tension subject the rivets to a shearing force. Usually, 
the shear strength of a material is either equal to or less than 
its tensile or compressive strength. Shear stress concerns the 
aviation technician chiefly from the standpoint of the rivet 
and bolt applications, particularly when attaching sheet metal, 
because if a rivet used in a shear application gives way, the 
riveted or bolted parts are pushed sideways. 

Bearing
Bearing stress resists the force that the rivet or bolt places 
on the hole. As a rule, the strength of the fastener should be 
such that its total shear strength is approximately equal to 
the total bearing strength of the sheet material. [Figure 4-2]

Torsion 
Torsion is the stress that produces twisting. While moving 
the aircraft forward, the engine also tends to twist it to one 
side, but other aircraft components hold it on course. Thus, 
torsion is created. The torsional strength of a material is its 
resistance to twisting or torque (twisting stress). The stresses 
arising from this action are shear stresses caused by the 
rotation of adjacent planes past each other around a common 


4-4

1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9

1   2   3   4        6   7   8   9

8   16  24  32  40  48  56

4    8   12  16  20  24  2828 4

56 8

19
1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9

4   8   12 16  20  24 284   8   12 16  20  24 28 4   8   12 16  20  24 28

8  16  24 32  40  48 568  16  24 32  40  48 56 8  16  24 32  40  48 56

1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9

1   2   3   4        6   7   8   9
5

1   2   3   4        6   7   8   9
5

1   2   3   4        6   7   8   9
5

9 1
5

10 THS
100 THS

32 MOS
64 THS

3

32

1 2 5

541

1 2 3 4 5

4

8 THS

16 THS

Figure 4-3. Scales. 

reference axis at right angles to these planes. This action may 
be illustrated by a rod fixed solidly at one end and twisted 
by a weight placed on a lever arm at the other, producing the 
equivalent of two equal and opposite forces acting on the rod 
at some distance from each other. A shearing action is set up 
all along the rod, with the center line of the rod representing 
the neutral axis. 

Bending 
Bending (or beam stress) is a combination of compression 
and tension. The rod in Figure 4-1E has been shortened 
(compressed) on the inside of the bend and stretched on 
the outside of the bend. Note that the bending stress causes 
a tensile stress to act on the upper half of the beam and a 
compressive stress on the lower half. These stresses act in 
opposition on the two sides of the center line of the member, 
which is called the neutral axis. Since these forces acting in 
opposite directions are next to each other at the neutral axis, 
the greatest shear stress occurs along this line, and none exists 
at the extreme upper or lower surfaces of the beam.

Tools for Sheet Metal Construction and 
Repair
Without modern metalworking tools and machines, the 
job of the airframe technician would be more difficult and 
tiresome, and the time required to finish a task would be 
much greater. These specialized tools and machines help the 
airframe technician construct or repair sheet metal in a faster, 
simpler, and better manner than possible in the past. Powered 
by human muscle, electricity, or compressed air, these tools 
are used to lay out, mark, cut, sand, or drill sheet metal. 

Layout Tools
Before fitting repair parts into an aircraft structure, the new 
sections must be measured and marked, or laid out to the 
dimensions needed to make the repair part. Tools utilized 
for this process are discussed in this section. 

Scales
Scales are available in various lengths, with the 6-inch and 
12-inch scales being the most common and affordable. A 
scale with fractions on one side and decimals on the other side 
is very useful. To obtain an accurate measurement, measure 
with the scale held on edge from the 1-inch mark instead of 
the end. Use the graduation marks on the side to set a divider 
or compass. [Figure 4-3]

Combination Square
A combination square consists of a steel scale with three 
heads that can be moved to any position on the scale and 
locked in place. The three heads are a stock head that 
measures 90° and 45° angles, a protractor head that can 

measure any angle between the head and the blade, and a 
center head that uses one side of the blade as the bisector of 
a 90° angle. The center of a shaft can be found by using the 
center head. Place the end of the shaft in the V of the head 
and scribe a line along the edge of the scale. Rotate the head 
about 90° and scribe another line along the edge of the scale. 
The two lines will cross at the center of the shaft. [Figure 4-4]

Dividers
Dividers are used to transfer a measurement from a device 
to a scale to determine its value. Place the sharp points at 
the locations from which the measurement is to be taken. 
Then, place the points on a steel machinist’s scale, but put 
one of the points on the 1-inch mark and measure from there. 
[Figure 4-5]

Rivet Spacers
A rivet spacer is used to make a quick and accurate rivet 
pattern layout on a sheet. On the rivet spacer, there are 
alignment marks for 1⁄2-inch, 3⁄4-inch, 1-inch and 2-inch rivet 
spacing. [Figure 4-6]

Marking Tools
Pens
Fiber-tipped pens are the preferred method of marking 
lines and hole locations directly on aluminum, because the 
graphite in a No. 2 pencil can cause corrosion when used on 


4-5

112

01
8

0

90

3 4 5 8 9 10

Scriber

Level

Stock head Protractor head Center head

Figure 4-4. Combination square. 

Figure 4-5. Divider.

Figure 4-7. Scribe.

Figure 4-6. Rivet spacer.

aluminum. Make the layout on the protective membrane if it 
is still on the material, or mark directly on the material with 
a fiber-tipped pen, such as a fine-point Sharpie®, or cover 
the material with masking tape and then mark on the tape.

Scribes
A scribe is a pointed instrument used to mark or score metal 
to show where it is to be cut. A scribe should only be used 
when marks will be removed by drilling or cutting because 
it makes scratches that weaken the material and could cause 
corrosion. [Figure 4-7]

Punches
Punches are usually made of carbon steel that has been 
hardened and tempered. Generally classified as solid or 
hollow, punches are designed according to their intended 
use. A solid punch is a steel rod with various shapes at the 
end for different uses. For example, it is used to drive bolts 
out of holes, loosen frozen or tight pins and keys, knock out 
rivets, pierce holes in a material, etc. The hollow punch is 
sharp edged and used most often for cutting out blanks. Solid 
punches vary in both size and point design, while hollow 
punches vary in size.


4-6

Transfer punch

Use old skin as template

New skin

Figure 4-8. Prick punch. 

Figure 4-9. Center punch.

Figure 4-10. Automatic center punch.

Figure 4-11. Transfer punch.

Prick Punch
A prick punch is primarily used during layout to place 
reference marks on metal because it produces a small 
indentation. [Figure 4-8] After layout is finished, the 
indentation is enlarged with a center punch to allow for 
drilling. The prick punch can also be used to transfer 
dimensions from a paper pattern directly onto the metal. 
Take the following precautions when using a prick punch: 

• Never strike a prick punch a heavy blow with a 
hammer because it could bend the punch or cause 
excessive damage to the item being worked.

• Do not use a prick punch to remove objects from holes 
because the point of the punch spreads the object and 
causes it to bind even more.

Center Punch
A center punch is used to make indentations in metal as an 
aid in drilling. [Figure 4-9] These indentations help the drill, 
which has a tendency to wander on a flat surface, stay on 
the mark as it goes through the metal. The traditional center 
punch is used with a hammer, has a heavier body than the 
prick punch, and has a point ground to an angle of about 60°. 
Take the following precautions when using a center punch:

• Never strike the center punch with enough force to 
dimple the item around the indentation or cause the 
metal to protrude through the other side of the sheet.

• Do not use a center punch to remove objects from holes 
because the point of the punch spreads the object and 
causes it to bind even more.

Automatic Center Punch
The automatic center punch performs the same function as an 
ordinary center punch, but uses a spring tension mechanism 
to create a force hard enough to make an indentation without 
the need for a hammer. The mechanism automatically strikes 
a blow of the required force when placed where needed and 
pressed. This punch has an adjustable cap for regulating 
the stroke; the point can be removed for replacement or 
sharpening. Never strike an automatic center punch with a 
hammer. [Figure 4-10]

Transfer Punch
A transfer punch uses a template or existing holes in the 
structure to mark the locations of new holes. The punch is 
centered in the old hole over the new sheet and lightly tapped 
with a mallet. The result should be a mark that serves to locate 
the hole in the new sheet. [Figure 4-11]

Drive Punch
The drive punch is made with a flat face instead of a point 
because it is used to drive out damaged rivets, pins, and 
bolts that sometimes bind in holes. The size of the punch 
is determined by the width of the face, usually 1⁄8-inch to 
1⁄4-inch. [Figure 4-12]


4-7

4

5

6

1

2

3

7

8

9

10

11

12

Figure 4-12. Drive punch.

Figure 4-13. Pin punch.

Figure 4-14. Chassis punch.

Figure 4-15. Awl.

Figure 4-16. Awl usage.

Pin Punch
The pin punch typically has a straight shank characterized 
by a hexagonal body. Pin punch points are sized in 1⁄32-inch 
increments of an inch and range from 1⁄16-inch to 3⁄8-inch in 
diameter. The usual method for driving out a pin or bolt is 
to start working it out with a drive punch until the shank of 
the punch is touching the sides of the hole. Then use a pin 
punch to drive the pin or bolt the rest of the way out of the 
hole. [Figure 4-13]

Chassis Punch
A chassis punch is used to make holes in sheet metal parts for 
the installation of instruments and other avionics appliance, 
as well as lightning holes in ribs and spars. Sized in 1⁄16 of 
an inch, they are available in sizes from 1⁄2 inch to 3 inches. 
[Figure 4-14]

Awl
A pointed tool for marking surfaces or for punching small 
holes, an awl is used in aircraft maintenance to place scribe 
marks on metal and plastic surfaces and to align holes, such 
as in the installation of a deicer boot. [Figure 4-15]

Procedures for one use of an awl:

1. Place the metal to be scribed on a flat surface. Place 
a ruler or straightedge on the guide marks already 
measured and placed on the metal.

2. Remove the protective cover from the awl.

3. Hold the straightedge firmly. Hold the awl, as shown 
in Figure 4-16, and scribe a line along the straightedge.

4. Replace the protective cover on the awl. 

Hole Duplicator
Available in a variety of sizes and styles, hole duplicators, 
or hole finders, utilize the old covering as a template to 
locate and match existing holes in the structure. Holes in 
a replacement sheet or in a patch must be drilled to match 
existing holes in the structure and the hole duplicator 


4-8

New skin

Old skin

Angle

Figure 4-17. Hole duplicator.

Figure 4-18. Kett saw.

Figure 4-19. Pneumatic circular saw.

simplifies this process. Figure 4-17 illustrates one type of 
hole duplicator. The peg on the bottom leg of the duplicator 
fits into the existing rivet hole. To make the hole in the 
replacement sheet or patch, drill through the bushing on the 
top leg. If the duplicator is properly made, holes drilled in 
this manner are in perfect alignment. A separate duplicator 
must be used for each diameter of rivet. 

Cutting Tools
Powered and nonpowered metal cutting tools available to the 
aviation technician include various types of saws, nibblers, 
shears, sanders, notchers, and grinders. 

Circular-Cutting Saws
The circular-cutting saw cuts with a toothed, steel disk that 
rotates at high speed. Handheld or table mounted and powered 
by compressed air, this power saw cuts metal or wood. To 
prevent the saw from grabbing the metal, keep a firm grip 
on the saw handle at all times. Check the blade carefully for 
cracks prior to installation because a cracked blade can fly 
apart during use, possibly causing serious injury.

Kett Saw 
The Kett saw is an electrically operated, portable circular 
cutting saw that uses blades of various diameters. [Figure 4-18] 
Since the head of this saw can be turned to any desired angle, 
it is useful for removing damaged sections on a stringer. The 
advantages of a Kett saw include:

1. Can cut metal up to 3⁄16-inch in thickness.

2. No starting hole is required.

3. A cut can be started anywhere on a sheet of metal.

4. Can cut an inside or outside radius.

Pneumatic Circular-Cutting Saw
The pneumatic circular-cutting saw, useful for cutting out 
damage, is similar to the Kett saw. [Figure 4-19]

Reciprocating Saw
The versatile reciprocating saw achieves cutting action 
through a push and pull (reciprocating) motion of the blade. 
This saw can be used right sideup or upside down, a feature 
that makes it handier than the circular saw for working in tight 
or awkward spots. A variety of blade types are available for 
reciprocating saws; blades with finer teeth are used for cutting 
through metal. The portable, air-powered reciprocating saw 
uses a standard hacksaw blade and can cut a 360° circle or 
a square or rectangular hole. Unsuited for fine precision 
work, this saw is more difficult to control than the pneumatic 
circular-cutting saw. A reciprocating saw should be used in 
such a way that at least two teeth of the saw blade are cutting 
at all times. Avoid applying too much downward pressure on 
the saw handle because the blade may break. [Figure 4-20]


4-9

Figure 4-20. Reciprocating saw.

Figure 4-21. Die grinder and cut-off wheel.

Figure 4-22. Nibbler.

Figure 4-23. Power squaring shear.

Cut-off Wheel
A cut-off wheel is a thin abrasive disc driven by a high-speed 
pneumatic die-grinder and used to cut out damage on aircraft 
skin and stringers. The wheels come in different thicknesses 
and sizes. [Figure 4-21]

Nibblers
Usually powered by compressed air, the nibbler is another 
tool for cutting sheet metal. Portable nibblers utilize a high 
speed blanking action (the lower die moves up and down and 
meets the upper stationary die) to cut the metal. [Figure 4-22] 
The shape of the lower die cuts out small pieces of metal 
approximately 1⁄16 inch wide.

The cutting speed of the nibbler is controlled by the thickness 
of the metal being cut. Nibblers satisfactorily cut through 
sheets of metal with a maximum thickness of 1⁄16 inch. Too 
much force applied to the metal during the cutting operation 
clogs the dies (shaped metal), causing them to fail or the motor 
to overheat. Both electric and hand nibblers are available.

Shop Tools
Due to size, weight, and/or power source, shop tools are 
usually in a fixed location, and the airframe part to be 
constructed or repaired is brought to the tool.

Squaring Shear
The squaring shear provides the airframe technician with 
a convenient means of cutting and squaring sheet metal. 
Available as a manual, hydraulic, or pneumatic model, 
this shear consists of a stationary lower blade attached to 
a bed and a movable upper blade attached to a crosshead. 
[Figure 4-23]

Two squaring fences, consisting of thick strips of metal used 
for squaring metal sheets, are placed on the bed. One squaring 
fence is placed on the right side and one on the left to form a 
90° angle with the blades. A scale graduated in fractions of 
an inch is scribed on the bed for ease in placement.

To make a cut with a foot shear, move the upper blade down 
by placing the foot on the treadle and pushing downward. 
Once the metal is cut and foot pressure removed, a spring 
raises the blade and treadle. Hydraulic or pneumatic models 
utilize remote foot pedals to ensure operator safety. 


4-10

Figure 4-24. Foot-operated squaring shear. 

Figure 4-25. Throatless shears.

Figure 4-26. Scroll shears. 

The squaring shear performs three distinctly different 
operations:

1. Cutting to a line

2. Squaring

3. Multiple cutting to a specific size

When cutting to a line, place the sheet on the bed of the shears 
in front of the cutting blade with the cutting line even with 
the cutting edge of the bed. To cut the sheet with a foot shear, 
step on the treadle while holding the sheet securely in place. 

Squaring requires several steps. First, one end of the sheet 
is squared with an edge (the squaring fence is usually used 
on the edge). Then, the remaining edges are squared by 
holding one squared end of the sheet against the squaring 
fence and making the cut, one edge at a time, until all edges 
have been squared.

When several pieces must be cut to the same dimensions, use 
the backstop, located on the back of the cutting edge on most 
squaring shears. The supporting rods are graduated in fractions 
of an inch and the gauge bar may be set at any point on the rods. 
Set the gauge bar the desired distance from the cutting blade 
of the shears and push each piece to be cut against the gauge 
bar. All the pieces can then be cut to the same dimensions 
without measuring and marking each one separately.

Foot-operated shears have a maximum metal cutting capacity 
of 0.063 inch of aluminum alloy. Use powered squaring 
shears for cutting thicker metals. [Figure 4-24]

Throatless Shear 
Airframe technicians use the throatless shear to cut aluminum 
sheets up to 0.063 inches. This shear takes its name from the 
fact that metal can be freely moved around the cutting blade 
during cutting because the shear lacks a “throat” down which 

metal must be fed. [Figure 4-25] This feature allows great 
flexibility in what shapes can be cut because the metal can 
be turned to any angle for straight, curved, and irregular cuts. 
Also, a sheet of any length can be cut. 

A hand lever operates the cutting blade which is the top blade. 
Throatless shears made by the Beverly Shear Manufacturing 
Corporation, called BeverlyTM shears, are often used.

Scroll Shears
Scroll shears are used for cutting irregular lines on the 
inside of a sheet without cutting through to the edge. 
[Figure 4-26] The upper cutting blade is stationary while 
the lower blade is movable. A handle connected to the lower 
blade operates the machine.


4-11

Figure 4-27. Rotary punch press.

Figure 4-28. Band saw.

Figure 4-29. Combination disk and belt sander.

Rotary Punch Press
Used in the airframe repair shop to punch holes in metal 
parts, the rotary punch can cut radii in corners, make washers, 
and perform many other jobs where holes are required. 
[Figure 4-27] The machine is composed of two cylindrical 
turrets, one mounted over the other and supported by the 
frame, with both turrets synchronized to rotate together. 
Index pins, which ensure correct alignment at all times, may 
be released from their locking position by rotating a lever 
on the right side of the machine. This action withdraws the 
index pins from the tapered holes and allows an operator to 
turn the turrets to any size punch desired.

When rotating the turret to change punches, release the 
index lever when the desired die is within 1 inch of the ram, 
and continue to rotate the turret slowly until the top of the 
punch holder slides into the grooved end of the ram. The 
tapered index locking pins will then seat themselves in the 
holes provided and, at the same time, release the mechanical 
locking device, which prevents punching until the turrets are 
aligned.To operate the machine, place the metal to be worked 
between the die and punch. Pull the lever on the top of the 
machine toward the operator, actuating the pinion shaft, gear 
segment, toggle link, and the ram, forcing the punch through 
the metal. When the lever is returned to its original position, 
the metal is removed from the punch.

The diameter of the punch is stamped on the front of each 
die holder. Each punch has a point in its center that is 
placed in the center punch mark to punch the hole in the  
correct location. 

Band Saw
A band saw consists of a toothed metal band coupled to, 
and continuously driven around, the circumferences of two 
wheels. It is used to cut aluminum, steel, and composite parts. 

[Figure 4-28] The speed of the band saw and the type and 
style of the blade depends on the material to be cut. Band 
saws are often designated to cut one type of material, and 
if a different material is to be cut, the blade is changed. The 
speed is controllable and the cutting platform can be tilted 
to cut angled pieces.

Disk Sander
Disk sanders have a powered abrasive-covered disk or belt 
and are used for smoothing or polishing surfaces. The sander 
unit uses abrasive paper of different grits to trim metal parts. 
It is much quicker to use a disk sander than to file a part to 
the correct dimension. The combination disk and belt sander 
has a vertical belt sander coupled with a disk sander and is 
often used in a metal shop. [Figure 4-29]


4-12

Tool rest

Figure 4-30. Belt sander.

Figure 4-31. Notcher.

Figure 4-32. Power notcher. 

Figure 4-33. Grinder.

Belt Sander
The belt sander uses an endless abrasive belt driven by an 
electric motor to sand down metal parts much like the disk 
sander unit. The abrasive paper used on the belt comes in 
different degrees of grit or coarseness. The belt sander is 
available as a vertical or horizontal unit. The tension and 
tracking of the abrasive belt can be adjusted so the belt runs 
in the middle. [Figure 4-30]

Notcher
The notcher is used to cut out metal parts, with some 
machines capable of shearing, squaring, and trimming 
metal. [Figure 4-31] The notcher consists of a top and 
bottom die and most often cuts at a 90° angle, although some 
machines can cut metal into angles up to 180°. Notchers 
are available in manual and pneumatic models able to cut 
various thicknesses of mild steel and aluminum. This is an 

excellent tool for quickly removing corners from sheet metal 
parts. [Figure 4-32]

Wet or Dry Grinder
Grinding machines come in a variety of types and sizes, 
depending upon the class of work for which they are to be 
used. Dry and/or wet grinders are found in airframe repair 
shops. Grinders can be bench or pedestal mounted. A dry 
grinder usually has a grinding wheel on each end of a shaft 
that runs through an electric motor or a pulley operated by a 
belt. The wet grinder has a pump to supply a flow of water 
on a single grinding wheel. The water acts as a lubricant for 
faster grinding while it continuously cools the edge of the 
metal, reducing the heat produced by material being ground 
against the wheel. It also washes away any bits of metal or 
abrasive removed during the grinding operation. The water 
returns to a tank and can be re-used.

Grinders are used to sharpen knives, tools, and blades as 
well as grinding steel, metal objects, drill bits, and tools. 
Figure 4-33 illustrates a common type bench grinder 
found in most airframe repair shops. It can be used to 


4-13

Figure 4-34. Straight snips.

Figure 4-35. Aviation snips.

dress mushroomed heads on chisels and points on chisels, 
screwdrivers, and drills, as well as for removing excess metal 
from work and smoothing metal surfaces.

The bench grinder is generally equipped with one medium-
grit and one fine-grit abrasive wheel. The medium-grit wheel 
is usually used for rough grinding where a considerable 
quantity of material is to be removed or where a smooth finish 
is unimportant. The fine-grit wheel is used for sharpening 
tools and grinding to close limits. It removes metal more 
slowly, gives the work a smooth finish, and does not generate 
enough heat to anneal the edges of cutting tools.

Before using any type of grinder, ensure that the abrasive 
wheels are firmly held on the spindles by the flange nuts. 
An abrasive wheel that comes off or becomes loose could 
seriously injure the operator in addition to ruining the grinder. 
A loose tool rest could cause the tool or piece of work to be 
“grabbed” by the abrasive wheel and cause the operator’s 
hand to come in contact with the wheel, possibly resulting 
in severe wounds. 

Always wear goggles when using a grinder, even if eyeshields 
are attached to the grinder. Goggles should fit firmly against 
the face and nose. This is the only way to protect the eyes 
from the fine pieces of steel. Goggles that do not fit properly 
should be exchanged for ones that do fit. Be sure to check 
the abrasive wheel for cracks before using the grinder. A 
cracked abrasive wheel is likely to fly apart when turning at 
high speeds. Never use a grinder unless it is equipped with 
wheel guards that are firmly in place.

Grinding Wheels
A grinding wheel is made of a bonded abrasive and provides 
an efficient way to cut, shape, and finish metals. Available in 
a wide variety of sizes and numerous shapes, grinding wheels 
are also used to sharpen knives, drill bits, and many other 
tools, or to clean and prepare surfaces for painting or plating.

Grinding wheels are removable and a polishing or buffing 
wheel can be substituted for the abrasive wheel. Silicon 
carbide and aluminum oxide are the kinds of abrasives used 
in most grinding wheels. Silicon carbide is the cutting agent 
for grinding hard, brittle material, such as cast iron. It is 
also used in grinding aluminum, brass, bronze, and copper. 
Aluminum oxide is the cutting agent for grinding steel and 
other metals of high tensile strength.

Hand Cutting Tools
Many types of hand cutting tools are available to cut light 
gauge sheet metal. Four cutting tools commonly found in the 
air frame repair shop are straight hand snips, aviation snips, 
files, and burring tools.

Straight Snips
Straight snips, or sheet metal shears, have straight 
blades with cutting edges sharpened to an 85° angle. 
[Figure 4-34] Available in sizes ranging from 6 to 14 inches, 
they cut aluminum up to 1⁄16 of an inch. Straight snips can be 
used for straight cutting and large curves, but aviation snips 
are better for cutting circles or arcs.

Aviation Snips
Aviation snips are used to cut holes, curved parts, round 
patches, and doublers (a piece of metal placed under a part 
to make it stiffer) in sheet metal. Aviation snips have colored 
handles to identify the direction of the cuts: yellow aviation 
snips cut straight, green aviation snips curve right, and red 
aviation snips curve left. [Figure 4-35]

Files
The file is an important but often overlooked tool used to 
shape metal by cutting and abrasion. Files have five distinct 
properties: length, contour, the form in cross section, the 
kind of teeth, and the fineness of the teeth. Many different 
types of files are available and the sizes range from 3 to 18 
inches. [Figure 4-36]


4-14

Figure 4-36. Files. Figure 4-37. Die grinder.

Figure 4-38. Burring tools.

The portion of the file on which the teeth are cut is called the 
face. The tapered end that fits into the handle is called the 
tang. The part of the file where the tang begins is the heel. 
The length of a file is the distance from the point or tip to the 
heel and does not include the tang. The teeth of the file do 
the cutting. These teeth are set at an angle across the face of 
the file. A file with a single row of parallel teeth is called a 
single-cut file. The teeth are cut at an angle of 65°–85° to the 
centerline, depending on the intended use of the file. Files 
that have one row of teeth crossing another row in a crisscross 
pattern are called double-cut files. The angle of the first set 
usually is 40°–50° and that of the crossing teeth 70°–80°. 
Crisscrossing produces a surface that has a very large number 
of little teeth that slant toward the tip of the file. Each little 
tooth looks like an end of a diamond point cold chisel.

Files are graded according to the tooth spacing; a coarse file 
has a small number of large teeth, and a smooth file has a large 
number of fine teeth. The coarser the teeth, the more metal is 
removed on each stroke of the file. The terms used to indicate 
the coarseness or fineness of a file are rough, coarse, bastard, 
second cut, smooth, and dead smooth, and the file may be 
either single cut or double cut. Files are further classified 
according to their shape. Some of the more common types 
are: flat, triangle, square, half round, and round.

There are several filing techniques. The most common is to 
remove rough edges and slivers from the finished part before 
it is installed. Crossfiling is a method used for filing the 
edges of metal parts that must fit tightly together. Crossfiling 
involves clamping the metal between two strips of wood 
and filing the edge of the metal down to a preset line. Draw 
filing is used when larger surfaces need to be smoothed and 
squared. It is done by drawing the file over the entire surface 
of the work.

To protect the teeth of a file, files should be stored separately 
in a plastic wrap or hung by their handles. Files kept in a 
toolbox should be wrapped in waxed paper to prevent rust 

from forming on the teeth. File teeth can be cleaned with a 
file card. 

Die Grinder
A die grinder is a handheld tool that turns a mounted 
cutoff wheel, rotary file, or sanding disk at high speed. 
[Figure 4-37] Usually powered by compressed air, electric 
die grinders are also used. Pneumatic die grinders run at 
12,000 to 20,000 revolutions per minute (rpm) with the 
rotational speed controlled by the operator who uses a hand- 
or foot-operated throttle to vary the volume of compressed 
air. Available in straight, 45°, and 90° models, the die 
grinder is excellent for weld breaking, smoothing sharp 
edges, deburring, porting, and general high-speed polishing, 
grinding, and cutting. 

Burring Tool
This type of tool is used to remove a burr from an edge of a 
sheet or to deburr a hole. [Figure 4-38]

Hole Drilling
Drilling holes is a common operation in the airframe repair 
shop. Once the fundamentals of drills and their uses are 
learned, drilling holes for rivets and bolts on light metal is 


4-15

Figure 4-39. Drill motors.

Figure 4-40. Angle drill motors.

Figure 4-41. Nutplate drill.

not difficult. While a small portable power drill is usually 
the most practical tool for this common operation in airframe 
metalwork, sometimes a drill press may prove to be the better 
piece of equipment for the job.

Portable Power Drills
Portable power drills operate by electricity or compressed air. 
Pneumatic drill motors are recommended for use on repairs 
around flammable materials where potential sparks from an 
electric drill motor might become a fire hazard.

When using the portable power drill, hold it firmly with both 
hands. Before drilling, be sure to place a backup block of 
wood under the hole to be drilled to add support to the metal 
structure. The drill bit should be inserted in the chuck and 
tested for trueness or vibration. This may be visibly checked 
by running the motor freely. A drill bit that wobbles or is 
slightly bent should not be used since such a condition causes 
enlarged holes. The drill should always be held at right angles 
to the work regardless of the position or curvatures. Tilting 
the drill at any time when drilling into or withdrawing from 
the material may cause elongation (egg shape) of the hole. 
When drilling through sheet metal, small burrs are formed 
around the edge of the hole. Burrs must be removed to allow 
rivets or bolts to fit snugly and to prevent scratching. Burrs 
may be removed with a bearing scraper, a countersink, or 
a drill bit larger than the hole. If a drill bit or countersink 
is used, it should be rotated by hand. Always wear safety 
goggles while drilling.

Pneumatic Drill Motors
Pneumatic drill motors are the most common type of drill 
motor for aircraft repair work. [Figure 4-39] They are 
lightweight and have sufficient power and good speed 
control. Drill motors are available in many different sizes 
and models. Most drill motors used for aircraft sheet metal 
work are rated at 3,000 rpm, but if drilling deep holes or 
drilling in hard materials, such as corrosion resistant steel 

or titanium, a drill motor with more torque and lower rpm 
should be selected to prevent damage to tools and materials.

Right Angle and 45° Drill Motors
Right angle and 45° drill motors are used for positions that are 
not accessible with a pistol grip drill motor. Most right angle 
drill motors use threaded drill bits that are available in several 
lengths. Heavy-duty right angle drills are equipped with a 
chuck similar to the pistol grip drill motor. [Figure 4-40]

Two Hole 
Special drill motors that drill two holes at the same time are 
used for the installation of nutplates. By drilling two holes 
at the same time, the distance between the holes is fixed and 
the holes line up perfectly with the holes in the nutplate. 
[Figure 4-41]

Drill Press
The drill press is a precision machine used for drilling holes 
that require a high degree of accuracy. It serves as an accurate 
means of locating and maintaining the direction of a hole that 
is to be drilled and provides the operator with a feed lever 
that makes the task of feeding the drill into the work easier. 


4-16

Figure 4-42. Drill press. 

The upright drill press is the most common of the variety of 
drill presses available. [Figure 4-42]

When using a drill press, the height of the drill press table is 
adjusted to accommodate the height of the part to be drilled. 
When the height of the part is greater than the distance 
between the drill and the table, the table is lowered. When 
the height of the part is less than the distance between the 
drill and the table, the table is raised.

After the table is properly adjusted, the part is placed on the 
table and the drill is brought down to aid in positioning the 
metal so that the hole to be drilled is directly beneath the point 
of the drill. The part is then clamped to the drill press table to 
prevent it from slipping during the drilling operation. Parts 
not properly clamped may bind on the drill and start spinning, 
causing serious cuts on the operator’s arms or body, or loss 
of fingers or hands. Always make sure the part to be drilled 
is properly clamped to the drill press table before starting 
the drilling operation.

The degree of accuracy that it is possible to attain when using 
the drill press depends to a certain extent on the condition of 
the spindle hole, sleeves, and drill shank. Therefore, special 
care must be exercised to keep these parts clean and free from 
nicks, dents, and warpage. Always be sure that the sleeve is 
securely pressed into the spindle hole. Never insert a broken 
drill in a sleeve or spindle hole. Be careful never to use the 
sleeve-clamping vise to remove a drill since this may cause 
the sleeve to warp.

The drill speed on a drill press is adjustable. Always select the 
optimum drill speed for the material to be drilled. Technically, 
the speed of a drill bit means its speed at the circumference, 
in surface feet per minute (sfm). The recommended speed for 
drilling aluminum alloy is from 200 to 300 sfm, and for mild 
steel is 30 to 50 sfm. In practice, this must be converted into 
rpm for each size drill. Machinist and mechanic handbooks 

include drill rpm charts or drill rpm may be computed by 
use of the formula:

CS × 4 = rpm
                                         D    

CS = The recommended cutting speed in sfm

D = The diameter of the drill bit in inches

Example: At what rpm should a 1⁄8-inch drill turn to drill 
aluminum at 300 sfm?

Drill Extensions and Adapters 
When access to a place where drilling is difficult or 
impossible with a straight drill motor, various types of drill 
extensions and adapters are used. 

Extension Drill Bits
Extension drill bits are widely used for drilling holes in 
locations that require reaching through small openings or 
past projections. These drill bits, which come in 6- to 12-
inch lengths, are high speed with spring-tempered shanks. 
Extension drill bits are ground to a special notched point, 
which reduces end thrust to a minimum. When using 
extension drill bits always:

1. Select the shortest drill bit that will do the job. It is 
easier to control.

2. Check the drill bit for straightness. A bent drill bit 
makes an oversized hole and may whip, making it 
difficult to control.

3. Keep the drill bit under control. Extension drills 
smaller than 1⁄4-inch must be supported by a drill 
guard made from a piece of tubing or spring to prevent 
whipping.

Straight Extension
A straight extension for a drill can be made from an ordinary 
piece of drill rod. The drill bit is attached to the drill rod by 
shrink fitting, brazing, or silver soldering. 

Angle Adapters 
Angle adapters can be attached to an electric or pneumatic 
drill when the location of the hole is inaccessible to a straight 
drill. Angle adapters have an extended shank fastened to 
the chuck of the drill. The drill is held in one hand and the 
adapter in the other to prevent the adapter from spinning 
around the drill chuck.

Snake Attachment
The snake attachment is a flexible extension used for drilling 
in places inaccessible to ordinary drills. Available for electric 


4-17

Notched point chisel edge

Flute Cutting lipsLand

BodyShank

HSS

HSS

c/v

High speed steel, short shank

High speed steel, standard length (jobbers length)

Step drill

Cobalt vanadium alloy, standard length

Figure 4-43. Snake attachment.

Figure 4-44. Parts of a drill. 

Figure 4-45. Types of drill bits.

Figure 4-46. Twist drill bits.

and pneumatic drill motors, its flexibility permits drilling 
around obstructions with minimum effort. [Figure 4-43]

Types of Drill Bits 
A wide variety of drill bits including specialty bits for specific 
jobs are available. Figure 4-44 illustrates the parts of the 
drill bit and Figure 4-45 shows some commonly used drill 
bits. High speed steel (HSS) drill bits come in short shank or 
standard length, sometimes called jobbers length. HSS drill 
bits can withstand temperatures nearing the critical range of 
1,400 °F (dark cherry red) without losing their hardness. The 
industry standard for drilling metal (aluminum, steel, etc.), 
these drill bits stay sharper longer. 

Step Drill Bits
Typically, the procedure for drilling holes larger than 3⁄16 
inch in sheet metal is to drill a pilot hole with a No. 40 or 
No. 30 drill bit and then to oversize with a larger drill bit to 
the correct size. The step drill combines these two functions 
into one step. The step drill bit consists of a smaller pilot 
drill point that drills the initial small hole. When the drill bit 
is advanced further into the material, the second step of the 
drill bit enlarges the hole to the desired size.

Step drill bits are designed to drill round holes in most metals, 
plastic, and wood. Commonly used in general construction 
and plumbing, they work best on softer materials, such as 
plywood, but can be used on very thin sheet metal. Step drill 
bits can also be used to deburr holes left by other bits.

Cobalt Alloy Drill Bits
Cobalt alloy drill bits are designed for hard, tough metals like 
corrosion-resistant steel and titanium. It is important for the 
aircraft technician to note the difference between HSS and 
cobalt, because HSS drill bits wear out quickly when drilling 
titanium or stainless. Cobalt drill bits are excellent for drilling 
titanium or stainless steel, but do not produce a quality hole 
in aluminum alloys. Cobalt drill bits can be recognized by 
thicker webs and a taper at the end of the drill shank. 

Twist Drill Bits
Easily the most popular drill bit type, the twist drill bit has 
spiral grooves or flutes running along its working length. 
[Figure 4-46] This drill bit comes in a single-fluted, two-
fluted, three-fluted, and four-fluted styles. Single-fluted and 
two-fluted drill bits (most commonly available) are used for 
originating holes. Three-fluted and four-fluted drill bits are 
used interchangeably to enlarge existing holes. Twist drill 


4-18

80

79

1/54

78

77

76

75

74

73

72

71

70

69

68

1/32

67

66

65

64

63

62

61

60

59

58

57

56

3/64

55

54

53

1/16

52

51

50

49

48

5/64

47

46

45

44

43

42

3/32

41

40

39

38

37

36

7/64

35

34

33

32

31

1/8

30

29

28

9/64

27

26

25

24

23

5/32

22

21

20

19

18

11/64

17

16

15

14

13

3/16

12

11

10

9

8

7

13/64

6

5

4

3

7/32

2

1

A

15/64

B

C

D

1/4

E

F

G

17/64

H

I

J

K

9/32

L

M

19/64

N

5/16

O

P

21/64

Q

R

11/32

S

T

23/64

U

3/8

V

W

25/64

X

Y

13/32

Z

27/64

7/16

29/64

15/32

31/64

1/2

33/64

17/32

35/64

9/16

37/64

19/32

39/84

5/8

41/64

21/32

43/64

11/16

45/64

23/32

47/64

3/4

49/64

25/32

51/64

13/16

53/64

27/32

55/64

7/8

57/64

29/32

59/64

15/16

61/64

31/32

63/64

1

.0135

.0145

.0156

.0160

.0180

.0200

.0210

.0225

.0240

.0250

.0260

.0280

.0293

.0310

.0312

.0320

.0330

.0350

.0360

.0370

.0380

.0390

.0400

.0410

.0420

.0430

.0465

.0468

.0520

.0550

.0595

.0625

.0635

.0670

.0700

.0730

.0760

.0781

.0785

.0810

.0820

.0860

.0890

.0935

.0937

.0960

.0980

.0995

.1015

.1040

.1065

.1093

.1100

.1110

.1130

.1160

.1200

.1250

.1285

.1360

.1405

.1406

.1440

.1470

.1495

.1520

.1540

.1562

.1570

.1590

.1610

.1660

.1695

.1718

.1730

.1770

.1800

.1820

.1850

.1875

.1890

.1910

.1935

.1960

.1990

.2010

.2031

.2040

.2055

.2090

.2130

.2187

.2210

.2280

.2340

.2343

.2380

.2420

.2460

.2500

.2500

.2570

.2610

.2656

.2660

.2720

.2770

.2810

.2812

.2900

.2950

.2968

.3020

.3125

.3160

.3230

.3281

.3320

.3390

.3437

.3480

.3580

.3593

.3680

.3750

.3770

.3860

.3906

.3970

.4040

.4062

.4130

.4219

.4375

.4531

.4687

.4844

.5000

.5156

.5312

.5469

.5625

.5781

.5937

.6094

.6250

.6406

.6562

.6719

.6875

.7031

.7187

.7344

.7500

.7656

.7812

.7969

.8125

.8281

.8437

.8594

.8750

.8906

.9062

.9219

.9375

.9531

.9687

.9844

Drill
Size

Drill
Size

Drill
Size

Drill
Size

Drill
Size

Decimal
(Inches)

Decimal
(Inches)

Decimal
(Inches)

Decimal
(Inches)

Decimal
(Inches)

1.0000

Figure 4-47. Drill sizes and decimal equivalents.

bits are available in a wide choice of tooling materials and 
lengths with the variations targeting specific projects.

The standard twist drill bits used for drilling aluminum are 
made from HSS and have a 135° split point. Drill bits for 
titanium are made from cobalt vanadium for increased wear 
resistance. 

Drill Bit Sizes
Drill diameters are grouped by three size standards: number, 
letter, and fractional. The decimal equivalents of standard 
drill are shown in Figure 4-47.

Drill Lubrication
Normal drilling of sheet material does not require lubrication, 
but lubrication should be provided for all deeper drilling 
Lubricants serve to assist in chip removal, which prolongs drill 
life and ensures a good finish and dimensional accuracy of the 
hole. It does not prevent overheating. The use of a lubricant 
is always a good practice when drilling castings, forgings, or 
heavy gauge stock. A good lubricant should be thin enough 
to help in chip removal but thick enough to stick to the drill. 
For aluminum, titanium, and corrosion-resistant steel, a cetyl 
alcohol based lubricant is the most satisfactory. Cetyl alcohol is 
a nontoxic fatty alcohol chemical produced in liquid, paste, and 
solid forms. The solid stick and block forms quickly liquefy at 


4-19

1

2

3

HSS

Arm-type bushing holderBushing holder

Figure 4-48. Reamers. 

Figure 4-49. Drill stop. 

Figure 4-50. Drill bushings.

drilling temperatures. For steel, sulfurized mineral cutting oil is 
superior. Sulfur has an affinity for steel, which aids in holding 
the cutting oil in place. In the case of deep drilling, the drill 
should be withdrawn at intervals to relieve chip packing and 
to ensure the lubricant reaches the point. As a general rule, if 
the drill is large or the material hard, use a lubricant.

Reamers
Reamers, used for enlarging holes and finishing them 
smooth to a required size, are made in many styles. They 
can be straight or tapered, solid or expansive, and come 
with straight or helical flutes. Figure 4-48 illustrates three 
types of reamers:

1. Three or four fluted production bullet reamers are 
customarily used where a finer finish and/or size is 
needed than can be achieved with a standard drill bit.

2. Standard or straight reamer.

3. Piloted reamer, with the end reduced to provide 
accurate alignment.

The cylindrical parts of most straight reamers are not cutting 
edges, but merely grooves cut for the full length of the reamer 
body. These grooves provide a way for chips to escape and 
a channel for lubricant to reach the cutting edge. Actual 
cutting is done on the end of the reamer. The cutting edges 
are normally ground to a bevel of 45° ± 5°.

Reamer flutes are not designed to remove chips like a drill. 
Do not attempt to withdraw a reamer by turning it in the 
reverse direction because chips can be forced into the surface, 
scarring the hole.

Drill Stops
A spring drill stop is a wise investment. [Figure 4-49] 
Properly adjusted, it can prevent excessive drill penetration 
that might damage underlying structure or injure personnel 
and prevent the drill chuck from marring the surface. Drill 
stops can be made from tubing, fiber rod, or hard rubber.

Drill Bushings and Guides
There are several types of tools available that aid in holding 
the drill perpendicular to the part. They consist of a hardened 
bushing anchored in a holder. [Figure 4-50]

Drill bushing types:

1. Tube—hand-held in an existing hole

2. Commercial—twist lock

3. Commercial—threaded 

Drill Bushing Holder Types
There are four types of drill bushing holder:

1. Standard—fine for drilling flat stock or tubing/rod; 
uses insert-type bushings.

2. Egg cup—improvement on standard tripod base; 
allows drilling on both flat and curved material; 
interchangeable bushings allows flexibility. 
[Figure 4-51]

3. Plate—used primarily for interchangeable production 
components; uses commercial bushings and self-
feeding drills.

4. Arm—used when drilling critical structure; 
can be locked in position; uses interchangeable  
commercial bushings.


4-20

Figure 4-52. Drilled sheet metal.
Figure 4-53. Drilling large holes.

Figure 4-51. Bushing holder.

Hole Drilling Techniques
Precise location of drilled holes is sometimes required. 
When locating holes to close tolerances, accurately located 
punch marks need to be made. If a punch mark is too small, 
the chisel edge of the drill bit may bridge it and “walk off” 
the exact location before starting. If the punch mark is too 
heavy, it may deform the metal and/or result in a local strain 
hardening where the drill bit is to start cutting. The best size 
for a punch mark is about the width of the chisel edge of the 
drill bit to be used. This holds the drill point in place while 
starting. The procedure that ensures accurate holes follows: 
[Figure 4-52]

1. Measure and lay out the drill locations carefully and 
mark with crossed lines.

 NOTE: The chisel edge is the least efficient operating 
surface element of the twist drill bit because it does 
not cut, but actually squeezes or extrudes the work 
material. 

2. Use a sharp prick punch or spring-loaded center punch 
and magnifying glass to further mark the holes.

3. Seat a properly ground center punch (120°–135°) in 
the prick punch mark and, holding the center punch 
perpendicular to the surface, strike a firm square blow 
with a hammer.

4. Mark each hole with a small drill bit (1⁄16-inch 
recommended) to check and adjust the location prior 
to pilot drilling.

5. For holes 3⁄16-inch and larger, pilot drilling is 
recommended. Select a drill bit equal to the width 
of the chisel edge of the final drill bit size. Avoid 
using a pilot drill bit that is too large because it would 
cause the corners and cutting lips of the final drill bit 
to be dulled, burned, or chipped. It also contributes 
to chattering and drill motor stalling. Pilot drill at  
each mark.

6. Place the drill point at the center of the crossed lines, 
perpendicular to the surface, and, with light pressure, 
start drilling slowly. Stop drilling after a few turns and 
check to see if the drill bit is starting on the mark. It 
should be; if not, it is necessary to walk the hole a little 
by pointing the drill in the direction it should go, and 
rotating it carefully and intermittently until properly 
lined up.

7. Enlarge each pilot drilled hole to final size.

Drilling Large Holes
The following technique can be used to drill larger holes. 
Special tooling has been developed to drill large holes to 
precise tolerances. [Figure 4-53]

1. Pilot drill using a drill bushing. Bushings are sized for 
1⁄8, 3⁄16, or 1⁄4 drill bits.

2. Step drill bits are used to step the hole to approximately 
1⁄64-inch smaller than the final hole size. The aligning 
step diameter matches the pilot drill bit size.

3. Finish ream to size using a step reamer. The aligning 
step diameter matches the core drill bit size. Reamers 
should be available for both clearance and interference 
fit hole sizes.


4-21

Figure 4-54. Chip chaser.

Figure 4-55. Hammer and mallet forming.
Figure 4-56. Bar folder.

 NOTE: Holes can also be enlarged by using a series 
of step reamers.

Chip Chasers
The chip chaser is designed to remove chips and burrs lodged 
between sheets of metal after drilling holes for riveting. 
[Figure 4-54] Chip chasers have a plastic molded handle 
and a flexible steel blade with a hook in the end.

Forming Tools
Sheet metal forming dates back to the days of the blacksmith 
who used a hammer and hot oven to mold metal into the 
desired form. Today’s aircraft technician relies on a wide 
variety of powered and hand-operated tools to precisely bend 
and fold sheet metal to achieve the perfect shape. Forming 
tools include straight line machines, such as the bar folder and 
press brake, as well as rotary machines, such as the slip roll 
former. Forming sheet metal requires a variety of tools and 
equipment (both powered and manual), such as the piccolo 
former, shrinking and stretching tools, form blocks, and 
specialized hammers and mallets. [Figure 4-55]

Tempered sheet stock is used in forming operations whenever 
possible in typical repairs. Forming that is performed in the 
tempered condition, usually at room temperature, is known 
as cold-forming. Cold forming eliminates heat treatment and 
the straightening and checking operations required to remove 
the warp and twist caused by the heat treating process. Cold-
formed sheet metal experiences a phenomenon known as 
spring-back, which causes the worked piece to spring back 
slightly when the deforming force is removed. If the material 
shows signs of cracking during cold forming over small radii, 
the material should be formed in the annealed condition. 

Annealing, the process of toughening steel by gradually 
heating and cooling it, removes the temper from metal, 
making it softer and easier to form. Parts containing small 
radii or compound curvatures must be formed in the annealed 
condition. After forming, the part is heat treated to a tempered 
condition before use on the aircraft.

Construction of interchangeable structural and nonstructural 
parts is achieved by forming flat sheet stock to make channel, 
angle, zee, and hat section members. Before a sheet metal part 
is formed, a flat pattern is made to show how much material 
is required in the bend areas, at what point the sheet must be 
inserted into the forming tool, or where bend lines are located. 
Determination of bend lines and bend allowances is discussed 
in greater detail in the section on layout and forming.

Bar Folding Machine
The bar folder is designed for use in making bends or folds 
along edges of sheets. [Figure 4-56] This machine is best 
suited for folding small hems, flanges, seams, and edges to 
be wired. Most bar folders have a capacity for metal up to 22 
gauge in thickness and 42 inches in length. Before using the 
bar folder, several adjustments must be made for thickness of 
material, width of fold, sharpness of fold, and angle of fold. 
The adjustment for thickness of material is made by adjusting 
the screws at each end of the folder. As this adjustment is 


4-22

Clamping fingers

Figure 4-57. Cornice brake.
Figure 4-58. Box and pan brake.

made, place a piece of metal of the desired thickness in the 
folder and raise the operating handle until the small roller 
rests on the cam. Hold the folding blade in this position and 
adjust the setscrews until the metal is clamped securely and 
evenly the full length of the folding blade. After the folder 
has been adjusted, test each end of the machine separately 
with a small piece of metal by actually folding it.

There are two positive stops on the folder, one for 45° folds 
or bends and the other for 90° folds or bends. A collar is 
provided that can be adjusted to any degree of bend within 
the capacity of the machine.

For forming angles of 45° or 90°, the appropriate stop is 
moved into place. This allows the handle to be moved 
forward to the correct angle. For forming other angles, the 
adjustable collar is used. This is accomplished by loosening 
the setscrew and setting the stop at the desired angle. After 
setting the stop, tighten the setscrew and complete the bend. 
To make the fold, adjust the machine correctly and then 
insert the metal. The metal goes between the folding blade 
and the jaw. Hold the metal firmly against the gauge and 
pull the operating handle toward the body. As the handle 
is brought forward, the jaw automatically raises and holds 
the metal until the desired fold is made. When the handle is 
returned to its original position, the jaw and blade return to 
their original positions and release the metal.

Cornice Brake
A brake is similar to a bar folder because it is also used for 
turning or bending the edges of sheet metal. The cornice brake 
is more useful than the bar folder because its design allows 
the sheet metal to be folded or formed to pass through the 
jaws from front to rear without obstruction. [Figure 4-57] In 
contrast, the bar folder can form a bend or edge only as wide 
as the depth of its jaws. Thus, any bend formed on a bar folder 
can also be made on the cornice brake.

In making ordinary bends with the cornice brake, the sheet 
is placed on the bed with the sight line (mark indicating line 
of bend) directly under the edge of the clamping bar. The 
clamping bar is then brought down to hold the sheet firmly 
in place. The stop at the right side of the brake is set for the 
proper angle or amount of bend and the bending leaf is raised 
until it strikes the stop. If other bends are to be made, the 
clamping bar is lifted and the sheet is moved to the correct 
position for bending.

The bending capacity of a cornice brake is determined by the 
manufacturer. Standard capacities of this machine are from 
12- to 22-gauge sheet metal, and bending lengths are from 3 
to 12 feet. The bending capacity of the brake is determined by 
the bending edge thickness of the various bending leaf bars.

Most metals have a tendency to return to their normal 
shape—a characteristic known as spring-back. If the cornice 
brake is set for a 90° bend, the metal bent probably forms 
an angle of about 87° to 88°. Therefore, if a bend of 90° is 
desired, set the cornice brake to bend an angle of about 93° 
to allow for spring-back.

Box and Pan Brake (Finger Brake)
The box and pan brake, often called the finger brake because 
it is equipped with a series of steel fingers of varying widths, 
lacks the solid upper jaw of the cornice brake. [Figure 4-58] 
The box and pan brake can be used to do everything that the 
cornice brake can do, as well as several things the cornice 
brake cannot do.

The box and pan brake is used to form boxes, pans, and 
other similar shaped objects. If these shapes were formed 
on a cornice brake, part of the bend on one side of the box 
would have to be straightened in order to make the last bend. 
With a finger brake, simply remove the fingers that are in the 
way and use only the fingers required to make the bend. The 
fingers are secured to the upper leaf by thumbscrews. All the 


4-23

Operating handle

Housing

Grooves

Upper front roll

Lower front roll
Base

Grooves

Figure 4-59. Press brake.

Figure 4-60. Slip roll former.

fingers not removed for an operation must be securely seated 
and firmly tightened before the brake is used. The radius of 
the nose on the clamping fingers is usually rather small and 
frequently requires nose radius shims to be custom made for 
the total length of the bend. 

Press Brake
Since most cornice brakes and box and pan brakes are limited 
to a maximum forming capacity of approximately 0.090-
inch annealed aluminum, 0.063-inch 7075T6, or 0.063-inch 
stainless steel, operations that require the forming of thicker 
and more complex parts use a press brake. [Figure 4-59] 
The press brake is the most common machine tool used to 
bend sheet metal and applies force via mechanical and/or 
hydraulic components to shape the sheet metal between the 
punch and die. Narrow U-channels (especially with long legs) 
and hat channel stringers can be formed on the press brake 
by using special gooseneck or offset dies. Special urethane 
lower dies are useful for forming channels and stringers. 
Power press brakes can be set up with back stops (some are 
computer controlled) for high volume production. Press brake 
operations are usually done manually and require skill and 
knowledge of safe use.

Slip Roll Former
With the exception of the brake, the slip roll is probably 
used more than any other machine in the shop. [Figure 4-60] 
This machine is used to form sheets into cylinders or other 
straight curved surfaces. It consists of right and left end 
frames with three solid rolls mounted in between. Gears, 
which are operated by either a hand crank or a power drive, 
connect the two gripping rolls. These rolls can be adjusted to 


4-24

the thickness of the metal by using the two adjusting screws 
located on the bottom of each frame. The two most common 
of these forming machines are the slip roll former and the 
rotary former. Available in various sizes and capabilities, 
these machines come in manual or powered versions. 

The slip roll former in Figure 4-60 is manually operated and 
consists of three rolls, two housings, a base, and a handle. 
The handle turns the two front rolls through a system of gears 
enclosed in the housing. The front rolls serve as feeding, or 
gripping, rolls. The rear roll gives the proper curvature to 
the work. When the metal is started into the machine, the 
rolls grip the metal and carry it to the rear roll, which curves 
it. The desired radius of a bend is obtained by the rear roll. 
The bend radius of the part can be checked as the forming 
operation progresses by using a circle board or radius gauge. 
The gauges can be made by cutting a piece of material to 
the required finished radius and comparing it to the radius 
being formed by the rolling operation. On some material, 
the forming operation must be performed by passing the 
material through the rolls several times with progressive 
settings on the forming roll. On most machines, the top roll 
can be released on one end, permitting the formed sheet to 
be removed from the machine without distortion.

The front and rear rolls are grooved to permit forming of 
objects that have wired edges. The upper roll is equipped with 
a release that permits easy removal of the metal after it has 
been formed. When using the slip roll former, the lower front 
roll must be raised or lowered before inserting the sheet of 
metal. If the object has a folded edge, there must be enough 
clearance between the rolls to prevent flattening the fold. If 
a metal requiring special care (such as aluminum) is being 
formed, the rolls must be clean and free of imperfections.

The rear roll must be adjusted to give the proper curvature 
to the part being formed. There are no gauges that indicate 
settings for a specific diameter; therefore, trial and error 
settings must be used to obtain the desired curvature. The 
metal should be inserted between the rolls from the front of 
the machine. Start the metal between the rolls by rotating the 
operating handle in a clockwise direction. A starting edge is 
formed by holding the operating handle firmly with the right 
hand and raising the metal with the left hand. The bend of 
the starting edge is determined by the diameter of the part 
being formed. If the edge of the part is to be flat or nearly 
flat, a starting edge should not be formed.

Ensure that fingers and loose clothing are clear of the rolls 
before the actual forming operation is started. Rotate the 
operating handle until the metal is partially through the rolls 
and change the left hand from the front edge of the sheet to the 
upper edge of the sheet. Then, roll the remainder of the sheet 

through the machine. If the desired curvature is not obtained, 
return the metal to its starting position by rotating the handle 
counterclockwise. Raise or lower the rear roll and roll the 
metal through the rolls again. Repeat this procedure until 
the desired curvature is obtained, then release the upper roll 
and remove the metal. If the part to be formed has a tapered 
shape, the rear roll should be set so that the rolls are closer 
together on one end than on the opposite end. The amount 
of adjustment must be determined by experimentation. If the 
job being formed has a wired edge, the distance between the 
upper and lower rolls and the distance between the lower front 
roll and the rear roll should be slightly greater at the wired 
end than at the opposite end. [Figure 4-61]

Rotary Machine
The rotary machine is used on cylindrical and flat sheet 
metal to shape the edge or to form a bead along the edge. 
[Figure 4-62] Various shaped rolls can be installed on the 
rotary machine to perform these operations. The rotary 
machine works best with thinner annealed materials.

Stretch Forming
In the process of stretch forming, a sheet of metal is shaped 
by stretching it over a formed block to just beyond the elastic 
limit where permanent set takes place with a minimum 
amount of spring-back. To stretch the metal, the sheet is 
rigidly clamped at two opposite edges in fixed vises. Then, the 
metal is stretched by moving a ram that carries the form block 
against the sheet with the pressure from the ram causing the 
material to stretch and wrap to the contour of the form block. 

Stretch forming is normally restricted to relatively large 
parts with large radii of curvature and shallow depth, such as 
contoured skin. Uniform contoured parts produced at a faster 
speed give stretch forming an advantage over hand formed 
parts. Also, the condition of the material is more uniform 
than that obtained by hand forming. 

Drop Hammer
The drop hammer forming process produces shapes by the 
progressive deformation of sheet metal in matched dies under 
the repetitive blows of a gravity-drop hammer or a power-
drop hammer. The configurations most commonly formed 
by the process include shallow, smoothly contoured double-
curvature parts, shallow-beaded parts, and parts with irregular 
and comparatively deep recesses. Small quantities of cup-
shaped and box-shaped parts, curved sections, and contoured 
flanged parts are also formed. Drop hammer forming is not a 
precision forming method and cannot provide tolerances as 
close as 0.03-inch to 0.06-inch. Nevertheless, the process is 
often used for sheet metal parts, such as aircraft components, 
that undergo frequent design changes, or for which there is 
a short run expectancy.


4-25

Figure 4-61. Slip roll operation.

Figure 4-62. Rotary machine.

Hydropress Forming
The rubber pad hydropress can be utilized to form many 
varieties of parts from aluminum and its alloys with relative 
ease. Phenolic, masonite, kirksite, and some types of hard 
setting moulding plastic have been used successfully as form 
blocks to press sheet metal parts, such as ribs, spars, fans, 
etc. To perform a press forming operation:

1. Cut a sheet metal blank to size and deburr edges. 

2. Set the form block (normally male) on the lower 
 press platen. 

3. Place the prepared sheet metal blank (with locating 
pins to prevent shifting of the blank when the pressure 
is applied). 

4. Lower or close the rubber pad-filled press head over 
the form block and the rubber envelope. 

5. The form block forces the blank to conform to its 
contour. 

Hydropress forming is usually limited to relatively flat parts 
with flanges, beads, and lightning holes. However, some 
types of large radii contoured parts can be formed by a 
combination of hand forming and pressing operations. 


4-26

Figure 4-63. Spin forming.

Figure 4-64. English wheel.

Figure 4-65. Piccolo former.

Spin Forming
In spin forming, a flat circle of metal is rotated at a very high 
speed to shape a seamless, hollow part using the combined 
forces of rotation and pressure. For example, a flat circular 
blank such as an aluminum disk, is mounted in a lathe in 
conjunction with a form block (usually made of hardwood). 
As the aircraft technician revolves the disc and form block 
together at high speeds, the disk is molded to the form 
block by applying pressure with a spinning stick or tool. It 
provides an economical alternative to stamping, casting, and 
many other metal forming processes. Propeller spinners are 
sometimes fabricated with this technique.

Aluminum soap, tallow, or ordinary soap can be used as a 
lubricant. The best adapted materials for spinning are the 
softer aluminum alloys, but other alloys can be used if the 
shape to be spun is not excessively deep or if the spinning 
is done in stages utilizing intermediate annealing to remove 
the effect of strain hardening that results from the spinning 
operation. Hot forming is used in some instances when 
spinning thicker and harder alloys. [Figure 4-63] 

Forming with an English Wheel
The English wheel, a popular type of metal forming tool 
used to create double curves in metal, has two steel wheels 
between which metal is formed. [Figure 4-64] Keep in mind 
that the English wheel is primarily a stretching machine, so 
it stretches and thins the metal before forming it into the 
desired shape. Thus, the operator must be careful not to 
over-stretch the metal. 

To use the English wheel, place a piece of sheet metal 
between the wheels (one above and one below the metal). 
Then, roll the wheels against one another under a pre-adjusted 
pressure setting. Steel or aluminum can be shaped by pushing 
the metal back and forth between the wheels. Very little 
pressure is needed to shape the panel, which is stretched or 
raised to the desired shape. It is important to work slowly and 

gradually curve the metal into the desired shape. Monitor the 
curvature with frequent references to the template.

The English wheel is used for shaping low crowns on large 
panels and polishing or planishing (to smooth the surface of a 
metal by rolling or hammering it) parts that have been formed 
with power hammers or hammer and shot bag.

Piccolo Former
The Piccolo former is used for cold forming and rolling sheet 
metal and other profile sections (extrusions). [Figure 4-65] The 
position of the ram is adjustable in height by means of either a 
handwheel or a foot pedal that permits control of the working 


4-27

Figure 4-66. Shrinking and stretching tools. 
Figure 4-67. Hand-operated shrinker and stretcher unit.

pressure. Be sure to utilize the adjusting ring situated in the 
machine head to control the maximum working pressure. The 
forming tools are located in the moving ram and the lower tool 
holder. Depending on the variety of forming tools included, 
the operator can perform such procedures as forming edges, 
bending profiles, removing wrinkles, spot shrinking to remove 
buckles and dents, or expanding dome sheet metal. Available 
in either fiberglass (to prevent marring the surface) or steel 
(for working harder materials) faces, the tools are the quick-
change type.

Shrinking and Stretching Tools
Shrinking Tools
Shrinking dies repeatedly clamp down on the metal, then shift 
inward. [Figure 4-66] This compresses the material between 
the dies, which actually slightly increases the thickness of 
the metal. Strain hardening takes place during this process, 
so it is best to set the working pressure high enough to 
complete the shape rather quickly (eight passes could be  
considered excessive).

CAUTION: Avoid striking a die on the radius itself when 
forming a curved flange. This damages the metal in the radius 
and decreases the angle of bend.

Stretching Tools
Stretching dies repeatedly clamp down on the surface and 
then shift outward. This stretches the metal between the dies, 
which decreases the thickness in the stretched area. Striking 
the same point too many times weakens and eventually cracks 
the part. It is advantageous to deburr or even polish the edges 
of a flange that must undergo even moderate stretching to 
avoid crack formation. Forming flanges with existing holes 
causes the holes to distort and possibly crack or substantially 
weaken the flange.

Manual Foot-Operated Sheet Metal Shrinker
The manual foot-operated sheet metal shrinker operates very 
similarly to the Piccolo former though it only has two primary 

functions: shrinking and stretching. The only dies available 
are steel faced and therefore tend to mar the surface of the 
metal. When used on aluminum, it is necessary to gently 
blend out the surface irregularities (primarily in the cladding), 
then treat and paint the part.

Since this is a manual machine, it relies on leg power, as the 
operator repeatedly steps on the foot pedal. The more force 
is applied, the more stresses are concentrated at that single 
point. It yields a better part with a series of smaller stretches 
(or shrinks) than with a few intense ones. Squeezing the dies 
over the radius damages the metal and flattens out some of 
the bend. It may be useful to tape a thick piece of plastic or 
micarta to the opposite leg to shim the radius of the angle 
away from the clamping area of the dies.

NOTE: Watch the part change shape while slowly applying 
pressure. A number of small stretches works more effectively 
than one large one. If applying too much pressure, the metal 
has the tendency to buckle. 

Hand-Operated Shrinker and Stretcher
The hand-operated shrinker and stretcher is similar to the 
manual foot-operated unit, except a handle is used to apply 
force to shrinking and stretching blocks. The dies are all 
metal and leave marks on aluminum that need to be blended 
out after the shrinking or stretching operation. [Figure 4-67]

Dollies and Stakes
Sheet metal is often formed or finished (planished) over 
anvils, available in a variety of shapes and sizes, called 
dollies and stakes. These are used for forming small, odd-
shaped parts, or for putting on finishing touches for which 
a large machine may not be suited. Dollies are meant to be 
held in the hand, whereas stakes are designed to be supported 
by a flat cast iron bench plate fastened to the workbench. 
[Figure 4-68]


4-28

Figure 4-69. Sheet metal mallet and hammers.

Figure 4-68. Dollies and stakes.

Most stakes have machined, polished surfaces that have been 
hardened. Use of stakes to back up material when chiseling, 
or when using any similar cutting tool, defaces the surface 
of the stake and makes it useless for finish work.

Hardwood Form Blocks
Hardwood form blocks can be constructed to duplicate 
practically any aircraft structural or nonstructural part. The 
wooden block or form is shaped to the exact dimensions and 
contour of the part to be formed.

V-Blocks
V-blocks made of hardwood are widely used in airframe 
metalwork for shrinking and stretching metal, particularly 
angles and flanges. The size of the block depends on the work 
being done and on personal preference. Although any type 
of hardwood is suitable, maple and ash are recommended for 
best results when working with aluminum alloys.

Shrinking Blocks
A shrinking block consists of two metal blocks and some 
device for clamping them together. One block forms the 
base and the other is cut away to provide space where the 
crimped material can be hammered. The legs of the upper 
jaw clamp the material to the base block on each side of 

the crimp to prevent the material from creeping away, but 
remains stationary while the crimp is hammered flat (being 
shrunk). This type of crimping block is designed to be held 
in a bench vise.

Shrinking blocks can be made to fit any specific need. The 
basic form and principle remain the same, even though the 
blocks may vary considerably in size and shape.

Sandbags
A sandbag is generally used as a support during the bumping 
process. A serviceable bag can be made by sewing heavy 
canvas or soft leather to form a bag of the desired size, and 
filling it with sand which has been sifted through a fine  
mesh screen.

Before filling canvas bags with sand, use a brush to coat the 
inside of the bag with softened paraffin or beeswax, which 
forms a sealing layer and prevents the sand from working 
through the pores of the canvas. Bags can also be filled with 
shot as an alternative to sand.

Sheet Metal Hammers and Mallets
The sheet metal hammer and the mallet are metal fabrication 
hand tools used for bending and forming sheet metal without 
marring or indenting the metal. The hammer head is usually 
made of high carbon, heat-treated steel, while the head of the 
mallet, which is usually larger than that of the hammer, is 
made of rubber, plastic, wood, or leather. In combination with 
a sandbag, V-blocks, and dies, sheet metal body hammers 
and mallets are used to form annealed metal. [Figure 4-69]

Sheet Metal Holding Devices
In order to work with sheet metal during the fabrication 
process, the aviation technician uses a variety of holding 
devices, such as clamps, vises, and fasteners to hold the 
work together. The type of operation being performed and 


4-29

Figure 4-70. C-clamps. 

Figure 4-71. A utility vise with swivel base and anvil.

Figure 4-72. Cleco fastener.

the type of metal being used determine what type of the 
holding device is needed.

Clamps and Vises 
Clamps and vises hold materials in place when it is not 
possible to handle a tool and the workpiece at the same 
time. A clamp is a fastening device with movable jaws that 
has opposing, often adjustable, sides or parts. An essential 
fastening device, it holds objects tightly together to prevent 
movement or separation. Clamps can be either temporary 
or permanent. Temporary clamps, such as the carriage 
clamp (commonly called the C-clamp), are used to position 
components while fixing them together.

C-Clamps
The C-clamp is shaped like a large C and has three main 
parts: threaded screw, jaw, and swivel head. [Figure 4-70]
The swivel plate or flat end of the screw prevents the end from 
turning directly against the material being clamped. C-clamp 
size is measured by the dimension of the largest object the 
frame can accommodate with the screw fully extended. 
The distance from the center line of the screw to the inside 
edge of the frame or the depth of throat is also an important 
consideration when using this clamp. C-clamps vary in size 
from two inches upward. Since C-clamps can leave marks 
on aluminum, protect the aircraft covering with masking tape 
at the places where the C-clamp is used.

Vises
Vises are another clamping device that hold the workpiece 
in place and allow work to be done on it with tools such as 
saws and drills. The vise consists of two fixed or adjustable 
jaws that are opened or closed by a screw or a lever. The size 
of a vise is measured by both the jaw width and the capacity 
of the vise when the jaws are fully open. Vises also depend 
on a screw to apply pressure, but their textured jaws enhance 
gripping ability beyond that of a clamp. 

Two of the most commonly used vises are the machinist’s 
vise and the utility vise. [Figure 4-71] The machinist’s 
vise has flat jaws and usually a swivel base, whereas the 
utility bench vise has scored, removable jaws and an anvil-
faced back jaw. This vise holds heavier material than the 
machinist’s vise and also grips pipe or rod firmly. The back 
jaw can be used as an anvil if the work being done is light. 
To avoid marring metal in the vise jaws, add some type of 
padding, such as a ready-made rubber jaw pad.

Reusable Sheet Metal Fasteners
Reusable sheet metal fasteners temporarily hold drilled sheet 
metal parts accurately in position for riveting or drilling. If 
sheet metal parts are not held tightly together, they separate 
while being riveted or drilled. The Cleco (also spelled Cleko) 
fastener is the most commonly used sheet metal holder. 
[Figure 4-72] 


4-30

Figure 4-73. Hex nut fastener.

Cleco Fasteners
The Cleco fastener consists of a steel cylinder body with a 
plunger on the top, a spring, a pair of step-cut locks, and a 
spreader bar. These fasteners come in six different sizes: 3⁄32, 
1⁄8, 5⁄32, 3⁄16, 1⁄4, and 3⁄8-inch in diameter with the size stamped on 
the fastener. Color coding allows for easy size recognition. A 
special type of plier fits the six different sizes. When installed 
correctly, the reusable Cleco fastener keeps the holes in the 
separate sheets aligned.

Hex Nut and Wing Nut Temporary Sheet Fasteners
Hex nut and wing nut fasteners are used to temporarily fasten 
sheets of metal when higher clamp up pressure is required. 
[Figure 4-73] Hex nut fasteners provide up to 300 pounds 
of clamping force with the advantage of quick installation 
and removal with a hex nut runner. Wing nut sheet metal 
fasteners, characterized by wing shaped protrusions, not only 
provide a consistent clamping force from 0 to 300 pounds, but 
the aircraft technician can turn and tighten these fasteners by 
hand. Cleco hex nut fasteners are identical to Cleco wing nut 
fasteners, but the Cleco hex nut can be used with pneumatic 
Cleco installers.

Aluminum Alloys
Aluminum alloys are the most frequently encountered type 
of sheet metal in aircraft repair. AC 43.13-1 Chapter 4, Metal 
Structure, Welding, and Brazing; Section 1, Identification 
of Metals (as revised) provides an in-depth discussion of 
all metal types. This section describes the aluminum alloys 
used in the forming processes discussed in the remainder of 
the chapter. 

In its pure state, aluminum is lightweight, lustrous, and 
corrosion resistant. The thermal conductivity of aluminum 
is very high. It is ductile, malleable, and nonmagnetic. When 
combined with various percentages of other metals (generally 
copper, manganese, and magnesium), aluminum alloys that 
are used in aircraft construction are formed. Aluminum 
alloys are lightweight and strong. They do not possess the 
corrosion resistance of pure aluminum and are usually treated 

to prevent deterioration. Alclad™ aluminum is an aluminum 
alloy with a protective cladding of aluminum to improve its 
corrosion resistance.

To provide a visual means for identifying the various 
grades of aluminum and aluminum alloys, aluminum stock 
is usually marked with symbols such as a Government 
Specification Number, the temper or condition furnished, 
or the commercial code marking. Plate and sheet are usually 
marked with specification numbers or code markings in 
rows approximately five inches apart. Tubes, bars, rods, 
and extruded shapes are marked with specification numbers 
or code markings at intervals of three to five feet along the 
length of each piece.

The commercial code marking consists of a number 
that identifies the particular composition of the alloy. 
Additionally, letter suffixes designate the basic temper 
designations and subdivisions of aluminum alloys.

The aluminum and various aluminum alloys used in aircraft 
repair and construction are as follows:

• Aluminum designated by the symbol 1100 is used 
where strength is not an important factor, but where 
weight economy and corrosion resistance are desired. 
This aluminum is used for fuel tanks, cowlings, and oil 
tanks. It is also used for repairing wingtips and tanks. 
This material is weldable.

• Alloy 3003 is similar to 1100 and is generally used 
for the same purposes. It contains a small percentage 
of magnesium and is stronger and harder than  
1100 aluminum.

• Alloy 2014 is used for heavy-duty forgings, plates, 
extrusions for aircraft fittings, wheels, and major 
structural components. This alloy is often used for 
applications requiring high strength and hardness, as 
well as for service at elevated temperatures.

• Alloy 2017 is used for rivets. This material is now in 
limited use.

• Alloy 2024, with or without Alclad™ coating, is 
used for aircraft structures, rivets, hardware, machine 
screw products, and other miscellaneous structural 
applications. In addition, this alloy is commonly 
used for heat-treated parts, airfoil and fuselage skins, 
extrusions, and fittings.

• Alloy 2025 is used extensively for propeller blades.

• Alloy 2219 is used for fuel tanks, aircraft skin, and 
structural components. This material has high fracture 
toughness and is readily weldable. Alloy 2219 is also 
highly resistant to stress corrosion cracking.


4-31

Countersunk head Universal head

Figure 4-74. Solid shank rivet styles. 

• Alloy 5052 is used where good workability, very 
good corrosion resistance, high fatigue strength, 
weldability, and moderate static strength are desired. 
This alloy is used for fuel, hydraulic, and oil lines.

• Alloy 5056 is used for making rivets and cable 
sheeting and in applications where aluminum comes 
into contact with magnesium alloys. Alloy 5056 
is generally resistant to the most common forms  
of corrosion.

• Cast aluminum alloys are used for cylinder 
heads, crankcases, fuel injectors, carburetors, and  
landing wheels.

• Various alloys, including 3003, 5052, and 1100 
aluminum, are hardened by cold working rather than 
by heat treatment. Other alloys, including 2017 and 
2024, are hardened by heat treatment, cold working, 
or a combination of the two. Various casting alloys 
are hardened by heat treatment.

• Alloy 6061 is generally weldable by all commercial 
procedures and methods. It also maintains acceptable 
toughness in many cryogenic applications. Alloy 6061 
is easily extruded and is commonly used for hydraulic 
and pneumatic tubing.

• Although higher in strength than 2024, alloy 7075 
has a lower fracture toughness and is generally used 
in tension applications where fatigue is not critical. 
The T6 temper of 7075 should be avoided in corrosive 
environments. However, the T7351 temper of 7075 
has excellent stress corrosion resistance and better 
fracture toughness than the T6 temper. The T76 temper 
is often used to improve the resistance of 7075 to 
exfoliate corrosion.

Structural Fasteners 
Structural fasteners, used to join sheet metal structures 
securely, come in thousands of shapes and sizes with many 
of them specialized and specific to certain aircraft. Since 
some structural fasteners are common to all aircraft, this 
section focuses on the more frequently used fasteners. For 
the purposes of this discussion, fasteners are divided into two 
main groups: solid shank rivets and special purpose fasteners 
that include blind rivets.  

Solid Shank Rivet 
The solid shank rivet is the most common type of rivet used 
in aircraft construction. Used to join aircraft structures, solid 
shank rivets are one of the oldest and most reliable types of 
fastener. Widely used in the aircraft manufacturing industry, 
solid shank rivets are relatively low-cost, permanently 
installed fasteners. They are faster to install than bolts 
and nuts since they adapt well to automatic, high-speed 

installation tools. Rivets should not be used in thick materials 
or in tensile applications, as their tensile strengths are quite 
low relative to their shear strength. The longer the total grip 
length (the total thickness of sheets being joined), the more 
difficult it becomes to lock the rivet. 

Riveted joints are neither airtight nor watertight unless special 
seals or coatings are used. Since rivets are permanently 
installed, they must be removed by drilling them out, a 
laborious task.

Description
Before installation, the rivet consists of a smooth cylindrical 
shaft with a factory head on one end. The opposite end is 
called the bucktail. To secure two or more pieces of sheet 
metal together, the rivet is placed into a hole cut just a bit 
larger in diameter than the rivet itself. Once placed in this 
predrilled hole, the bucktail is upset or deformed by any of 
several methods from hand-held hammers to pneumatically 
driven squeezing tools. This action causes the rivet to expand 
about 11⁄2 times the original shaft diameter, forming a second 
head that firmly holds the material in place.

Rivet Head Shape

Solid rivets are available in several head shapes, but the 
universal and the 100° countersunk head are the most 
commonly used in aircraft structures. Universal head rivets 
were developed specifically for the aircraft industry and 
designed as a replacement for both the round and brazier head 
rivets. These rivets replaced all protruding head rivets and are 
used primarily where the protruding head has no aerodynamic 
significant. They have a flat area on the head, a head diameter 
twice the shank diameter, and a head height approximately 
42.5 percent of the shank diameter. [Figure 4-74]  

The countersunk head angle can vary from 60° to 120°, but 
the 100° has been adopted as standard because this head style 
provides the best possible compromise between tension/
shear strength and flushness requirements. This rivet is used 
where flushness is required because the rivet is flat-topped 
and undercut to allow the head to fit into a countersunk or 
dimpled hole. The countersunk rivet is primarily intended 


4-32

Length in sixteenths of 
an inch

Diameter in thirty-seconds 
of an inch

Material or alloy (2117-T4)

Head shape (countersunk)

Specification 
(Military standard)

MS 20 426 AD 5  -  8

Figure 4-75. Rivet head shapes and their identifying code numbers.

for use when aerodynamics smoothness is critical, such as 
on the external surface of a high-speed aircraft. 

Typically, rivets are fabricated from aluminum alloys, such 
as 2017-T4, 2024-T4, 2117-T4, 7050, and 5056. Titanium, 
nickel-based alloys, such as Monel® (corrosion-resistant 
steel), mild steel or iron, and copper rivets are also used for 
rivets in certain cases. 

Rivets are available in a wide variety of alloys, head shapes, 
and sizes and have a wide variety of uses in aircraft structure. 
Rivets that are satisfactory for one part of the aircraft are often 
unsatisfactory for another part. Therefore, it is important 
that an aircraft technician know the strength and driving 
properties of the various types of rivets and how to identify 
them, as well as how to drive or install them.

Solid rivets are classified by their head shape, by the material 
from which they are manufactured, and by their size. 
Identification codes used are derived from a combination of 
the Military Standard (MS) and National Aerospace Standard 
(NAS) systems, as well as an older classification system 
known as AN for Army/Navy. For example, the prefix MS 
identifies hardware that conforms to written military standards. 
A letter or letters following the head-shaped code identify the 
material or alloy from which the rivet was made. The alloy 
code is followed by two numbers separated by a dash. The 
first number is the numerator of a fraction, which specifies 
the shank diameter in thirty-seconds of an inch. The second 
number is the numerator of a fraction in sixteenths of an inch 
and identifies the length of the rivet. Rivet head shapes and 
their identifying code numbers are shown in Figure 4-75.

The most frequently used repair rivet is the AD rivet because 
it can be installed in the received condition. Some rivet alloys, 
such as DD rivets (alloy 2024-T4), are too hard to drive in the 
received condition and must be annealed before they can be 
installed. Typically, these rivets are annealed and stored in 
a freezer to retard hardening, which has led to the nickname 

“ice box rivets.” They are removed from the freezer just prior 
to use. Most DD rivets have been replaced by E-type rivets 
which can be installed in the received condition.

The head type, size, and strength required in a rivet are 
governed by such factors as the kind of forces present at the 
point riveted, the kind and thickness of the material to be 
riveted, and the location of the part on the aircraft. The type 
of head needed for a particular job is determined by where 
it is to be installed. Countersunk head rivets should be used 
where a smooth aerodynamic surface is required. Universal 
head rivets may be used in most other areas.

The size (or diameter) of the selected rivet shank should 
correspond in general to the thickness of the material being 
riveted. If an excessively large rivet is used in a thin material, 
the force necessary to drive the rivet properly causes an 
undesirable bulging around the rivet head. On the other hand, 
if an excessively small rivet diameter is selected for thick 
material, the shear strength of the rivet is not great enough 
to carry the load of the joint. As a general rule, the rivet 
diameter should be at least two and a half to three times the 
thickness of the thicker sheet. Rivets most commonly chosen 
in the assembly and repair of aircraft range from 3⁄32-inch 
to 3⁄8-inch in diameter. Ordinarily, rivets smaller than 3⁄32-
inch in diameter are never used on any structural parts that  
carry stresses.

The proper sized rivets to use for any repair can also 
be determined by referring to the rivets (used by the 
manufacturer) in the next parallel row inboard on the wing 
or forward on the fuselage. Another method of determining 
the size of rivets to be used is to multiply the skin’s thickness 
by 3 and use the next larger size rivet corresponding to that 
figure. For example, if the skin is 0.040 inch thick, multiply 
0.040 inch by 3 to get 0.120 inch and use the next larger size 
of rivet, 1⁄8-inch (0.125 inch).

When rivets are to pass completely through tubular members, 
select a rivet diameter equivalent to at least 1⁄8 the outside 
diameter of the tube. If one tube sleeves or fits over another, 
take the outside diameter of the outside tube and use one-
eighth of that distance as the minimum rivet diameter. A good 
practice is to calculate the minimum rivet diameter and then 
use the next larger size rivet.

Whenever possible, select rivets of the same alloy number 
as the material being riveted. For example, use 1100 and 
3003 rivets on parts fabricated from 1100 and 3003 alloys, 
and 2117-1 and 2017-T rivets on parts fabricated from 2017 
and 2024 alloys.


4-33

1.25 d 1.5 d

1.33 d 1.5 d

1.66 d

.66 d .5 d .33 d

1.25 d 1.4 d 1.5 d

.66 d .6 d .5 d

1.25 d 1.33 d

Minimum MaximumPreferred

Minimum MaximumPreferred

Driven Rivet Standards

A, AD, B, DD Rivets

D, E, (KE), M Rivets

Formed 
head 
dimension

Formed 
head 
dimension

Predrive
protrusion

Predrive
protrusion

Standard Rivet Alloy Code Markings

Alloy code—A
Alloy—1100 or 3003 aluminum
Head marking—None

Shear strength—10 kilopounds
per square inch (KSI)
Nonstructural uses only

Alloy code—B
Alloy—5056 aluminum
Head marking—raised cross

Shear strength—28 KSI

Alloy code—AD
Alloy—2117 aluminum
Head marking—Dimple

Shear strength—30 KSI

Alloy code—D
Alloy—2017 aluminum
Head marking—Raised dot

Shear strength—38 KSI
38 KSI When driven as received
34 KSI When re-heat treated

Alloy code—DD
Alloy—2024 aluminum
Head marking—Two bars (raised)

Shear strength—41 KSI
Must be driven in “W” condition
(Ice-Box)

Alloy code—E, [KE*] *Boeing code
Alloy—7050 aluminum
Head marking—Raised ring

Shear strength—43 KSI
Replacement for DD rivet
to be driven in “T” condition

Figure 4-76. Rivet formed head dimensions. Figure 4-77. Rivet alloy strength.

The size of the formed head is the visual standard of a proper 
rivet installation. The minimum and maximum sizes, as well 
as the ideal size, are shown in Figure 4-76.

Installation of Rivets
Repair Layout

Repair layout involves determining the number of rivets 
required, the proper size and style of rivets to be used, their 
material, temper condition and strength, the size of the holes, 
the distances between the holes, and the distance between 
the holes and the edges of the patch. Distances are measured 
in terms of rivet diameter.

Rivet Length 

To determine the total length of a rivet to be installed, the 
combined thickness of the materials to be joined must first 
be known. This measurement is known as the grip length. 
The total length of the rivet equals the grip length plus the 
amount of rivet shank needed to form a proper shop head. 
The latter equals one and a half times the diameter of the rivet 
shank. Where A is total rivet length, B is grip length, and 
C is the length of the material needed to form a shop head, 
this formula can be represented as A = B + C. [Figure 4-76]

Rivet Strength

For structural applications, the strength of the replacement 
rivets is of primary importance. [Figure 4-77] Rivets made 
of material that is lower in strength should not be used as 

replacements unless the shortfall is made up by using a larger 
rivet. For example, a rivet of 2024-T4 aluminum alloy should 
not be replaced with one of 2117-T4 or 2017-T4 aluminum 
alloy unless the next larger size is used. 

The 2117-T rivet is used for general repair work, since it 
requires no heat treatment, is fairly soft and strong, and is 
highly corrosion resistant when used with most types of 
alloys. Always consult the maintenance manual for correct 
rivet type and material. The type of rivet head to select for 
a particular repair job can be determined by referring to the 
type used within the surrounding area by the manufacturer. 


4-34

Rivet Spacing
6D Distance Between

Rows 6D

Rivet Spacing
4D Distance Between

Rows 4D

Rivet Spacing
6D Distance Between

Rows 3D

Section A-AE E

DD

Incorrect - too close to edge

E = 1½D

Correct E = 2D

A A

Resultant crack Safe

2 D

2½ D

2 D + 1/16˝

2½ D + 1/16˝

Protruding head rivets

Countersunk rivets

Edge Distance/Edge 
Margin

Minimum Edge 
Distance

Preferred Edge 
Distance

Figure 4-78. Acceptable rivet patterns.

Figure 4-79. Minimum edge distance.

A general rule to follow on a flush-riveted aircraft is to apply 
flush rivets on the upper surface of the wing and stabilizers, 
on the lower leading edge back to the spar, and on the fuselage 
back to the high point of the wing. Use universal head rivets 
in all other surface areas. Whenever possible, select rivets of 
the same alloy number as the material being riveted.

Stresses Applied to Rivets

Shear is one of the two stresses applied to rivets. The shear 
strength is the amount of force required to cut a rivet that 
holds two or more sheets of material together. If the rivet 
holds two parts, it is under single shear; if it holds three 
sheets or parts, it is under double shear. To determine the 
shear strength, the diameter of the rivet to be used must be 
found by multiplying the thickness of the skin material by 3. 
For example, a material thickness of 0.040 inch multiplied by 
3 equals 0.120 inch. In this case, the rivet diameter selected 
would be 1⁄8 (0.125) inch.
 

Tension is the other stress applied to rivets. The resistance to 
tension is called bearing strength and is the amount of tension 
required to pull a rivet through the edge of two sheets riveted 
together or to elongate the hole. 

Rivet Spacing

Rivet spacing is measured between the centerlines of rivets 
in the same row. The minimum spacing between protruding 
head rivets shall not be less than 31⁄2 times the rivet diameter. 
The minimum spacing between flush head rivets shall not be 
less than 4 times the diameter of the rivet. These dimensions 
may be used as the minimum spacing except when specified 
differently in a specific repair procedure or when replacing 
existing rivets. 

On most repairs, the general practice is to use the same rivet 
spacing and edge distance (distance from the center of the 
hole to the edge of the material) that the manufacturer used in 
the area surrounding the damage. The SRM for the particular 
aircraft may also be consulted. Aside from this fundamental 
rule, there is no specific set of rules that governs spacing 
of rivets in all cases. However, there are certain minimum 
requirements that must be observed.

• When possible, rivet edge distance, rivet spacing, and 
distance between rows should be the same as that of 
the original installation.

• When new sections are to be added, the edge distance 
measured from the center of the rivet should never be 
less than 2 times the diameter of the shank; the distance 
between rivets or pitch should be at least 3 times the 
diameter; and the distance between rivet rows should 
never be less than 21⁄2 times the diameter.

Figure 4-78 illustrates acceptable ways of laying out a rivet 
pattern for a repair.

Edge Distance

Edge distance, also called edge margin by some manufacturers, 
is the distance from the center of the first rivet to the edge 
of the sheet. It should not be less than 2 or more than 4 rivet 
diameters and the recommended edge distance is about 21⁄2 
rivet diameters. The minimum edge distance for universal 
rivets is 2 times the diameter of the rivet; the minimum edge 
distance for countersunk rivets is 21⁄2 times the diameter of the 
rivet. If rivets are placed too close to the edge of the sheet, 
the sheet may crack or pull away from the rivets. If they are 
spaced too far from the edge, the sheet is likely to turn up at 
the edges. [Figure 4-79]

It is good practice to lay out the rivets a little further from the 
edge so that the rivet holes can be oversized without violating 


4-35

3D + 1/16"

4D + 1/16"

3/1/2D + 1/16"

4/1/2D + 1/16"

1 and 3 rows protruding head rivet layout

2 row protruding head rivet layout

1 and 3 rows countersunk head rivet layout

2 row countersunk head rivet layout

3D

4D

3/1/2D

4/1/2D

Rivet Spacing Preferred SpacingMinimum Spacing

Rivet pitch
(6 to 8 diameters)

Edge distance
(2 to 21/2 diameters)

Transverse pitch (75 percent of rivet pitch)

Single-row layout

Two-row layout

Three-row layout

Figure 4-80. Rivet spacing. 

Figure 4-81. Rivet layout.

the edge distance minimums. Add 1⁄16-inch to the minimum 
edge distance or determine the edge distance using the next 
size of rivet diameter. 

Two methods for obtaining edge distance: 

• The rivet diameter of a protruding head rivet is 3⁄32-
inch. Multiply 2 times 3⁄32-inch to obtain the minimum 
edge distance, 3⁄16-inch, add 1⁄16-inch to yield the 
preferred edge distance of 1⁄4-inch. 

• The rivet diameter of a protruding head rivet is 3⁄32-inch. 
Select the next size of rivet, which is 1⁄8-inch. Calculate 
the edge distance by multiplying 2 times 1⁄8-inch to get 
1⁄4-inch. 

Rivet Pitch

Rivet pitch is the distance between the centers of neighboring 
rivets in the same row. The smallest allowable rivet pitch is 3 
rivet diameters. The average rivet pitch usually ranges from 
4 to 6 rivet diameters, although in some instances rivet pitch 
could be as large as 10 rivet diameters. Rivet spacing on parts 
that are subjected to bending moments is often closer to the 
minimum spacing to prevent buckling of the skin between 
the rivets. The minimum pitch also depends on the number of 
rows of rivets. One-and three-row layouts have a minimum 
pitch of 3 rivet diameters, a two-row layout has a minimum 
pitch of 4 rivet diameters. The pitch for countersunk rivets 
is larger than for universal head rivets. If the rivet spacing 
is made at least 1⁄16-inch larger than the minimum, the rivet 
hole can be oversized without violating the minimum rivet 
spacing requirement. [Figure 4-80]

Transverse Pitch

Transverse pitch is the perpendicular distance between rivet 
rows. It is usually 75 percent of the rivet pitch. The smallest 
allowable transverse pitch is 21⁄2 rivet diameters. The smallest 
allowable transverse pitch is 21⁄2 rivet diameters. Rivet pitch 
and transverse pitch often have the same dimension and are 
simply called rivet spacing.

Rivet Layout Example

The general rules for rivet spacing, as it is applied to a 
straight-row layout, are quite simple. In a one-row layout, 
find the edge distance at each end of the row and then lay 

off the rivet pitch (distance between rivets), as shown in 
Figure 4-81. In a two-row layout, lay off the first row, place 
the second row a distance equal to the transverse pitch from 
the first row, and then lay off rivet spots in the second row 
so that they fall midway between those in the first row. In the 
three-row layout, first lay off the first and third rows, then 
use a straightedge to determine the second row rivet spots.

When splicing a damaged tube, and the rivets pass completely 
through the tube, space the rivets four to seven rivet diameters 
apart if adjacent rivets are at right angles to each other, and 
space them five to seven rivet diameters apart if the rivets 
are parallel to each other. The first rivet on each side of the 
joint should be no less than 21⁄2 rivet diameters from the end 
of the sleeve. 


4-36

Figure 4-82. Rivet cutters. Figure 4-83. Bucking bars. 

Rivet Installation Tools
The various tools needed in the normal course of driving 
and upsetting rivets include drills, reamers, rivet cutters or 
nippers, bucking bars, riveting hammers, draw sets, dimpling 
dies or other types of countersinking equipment, rivet guns, 
and squeeze riveters. C-clamps, vises, and other fasteners 
used to hold sheets together when riveting were discussed 
earlier in the chapter. Other tools and equipment needed in the 
installation of rivets are discussed in the following paragraphs.

Hand Tools

A variety of hand tools are used in the normal course of 
driving and upsetting rivets. They include rivet cutters, 
bucking bars, hand riveters, countersinks, and dimpling tools.

Rivet Cutter

The rivet cutter is used to trim rivets when rivets of the 
required length are unavailable. [Figure 4-82] To use the 
rotary rivet cutter, insert the rivet in the correct hole, place the 
required number of shims under the rivet head, and squeeze 
the cutter as if it were a pair of pliers. Rotation of the disks 
cuts the rivet to give the right length, which is determined 
by the number of shims inserted under the head. When using 
a large rivet cutter, place it in a vise, insert the rivet in the 
proper hole, and cut by pulling the handle, which shears off 
the rivet. If regular rivet cutters are not available, diagonal 
cutting pliers can be used as a substitute cutter.

Bucking Bar

The bucking bar, sometimes called a dolly, bucking 
iron, or bucking block, is a heavy chunk of steel whose 
countervibration during installation contributes to proper 
rivet installation. They come in a variety of shapes and sizes, 
and their weights ranges from a few ounces to 8 or 10 pounds, 
depending upon the nature of the work. Bucking bars are 
most often made from low-carbon steel that has been case 
hardened or alloy bar stock. Those made of better grades of 
steel last longer and require less reconditioning. 

Bucking faces must be hard enough to resist indentation and 
remain smooth, but not hard enough to shatter. Sometimes, 
the more complicated bars must be forged or built up by 
welding. The bar usually has a concave face to conform to the 
shape of the shop head to be made. When selecting a bucking 
bar, the first consideration is shape. [Figure 4-83] If the bar 
does not have the correct shape, it deforms the rivet head; 
if the bar is too light, it does not give the necessary bucking 
weight, and the material may become bulged toward the shop 
head. If the bar is too heavy, its weight and the bucking force 
may cause the material to bulge away from the shop head. 

This tool is used by holding it against the shank end of a rivet 
while the shop head is being formed. Always hold the face 
of the bucking bar at right angles to the rivet shank. Failure 
to do so causes the rivet shank to bend with the first blows 
of the rivet gun and causes the material to become marred 
with the final blows. The bucker must hold the bucking bar 
in place until the rivet is completely driven. If the bucking 
bar is removed while the gun is in operation, the rivet set 
may be driven through the material. Allow the weight of the 
bucking bar to do most of the work and do not bear down 
too heavily on the shank of the rivet. The operator’s hands 
merely guide the bar and supply the necessary tension and 
rebound action. Coordinated bucking allows the bucking bar 
to vibrate in unison with the gun set. With experience, a high 
degree of skill can be developed.

Defective rivet heads can be caused by lack of proper 
vibrating action, the use of a bucking bar that is too light or 
too heavy, and failure to hold the bucking bar at right angles 
to the rivet. The bars must be kept clean, smooth, and well 
polished. Their edges should be slightly rounded to prevent 
marring the material surrounding the riveting operation. 

Hand Rivet Set

A hand rivet set is a tool equipped with a die for driving a 
particular type rivet. Rivet sets are available to fit every size 
and shape of rivet head. The ordinary set is made of 1⁄2-inch 


4-37

100°

82°

Pilot

Cutter

Micro-sleeve Skirt

Locking ring

Figure 4-84. Countersinks.

Figure 4-85. Microstop countersink.

Figure 4-86. Rivet guns.

carbon tool steel about 6 inches in length and is knurled 
to prevent slipping in the hand. Only the face of the set is 
hardened and polished.

Sets for universal rivets are recessed (or cupped) to fit the 
rivet head. In selecting the correct set, be sure it provides the 
proper clearance between the set and the sides of the rivet 
head and between the surfaces of the metal and the set. Flush 
or flat sets are used for countersunk and flathead rivets. To 
seat flush rivets properly, be sure that the flush sets are at 
least 1 inch in diameter.

Special draw sets are used to draw up the sheets to eliminate 
any opening between them before the rivet is bucked. Each 
draw set has a hole 1⁄32-inch larger than the diameter of the 
rivet shank for which it is made. Occasionally, the draw set 
and rivet header are incorporated into one tool. The header 
part consists of a hole shallow enough for the set to expand 
the rivet and head when struck with a hammer.

Countersinking Tool

The countersink is a tool that cuts a cone-shaped depression 
around the rivet hole to allow the rivet to set flush with 
the surface of the skin. Countersinks are made with angles 
to correspond with the various angles of countersunk 
rivet heads. The standard countersink has a 100º angle, 
as shown in Figure 4-84. Special microstop countersinks 
(commonly called stop countersinks) are available that can 
be adjusted to any desired depth and have cutters to allow 
interchangeable holes with various countersunk angles to 
be made. [Figure 4-85] Some stop countersinks also have 
a micrometer set mechanism, in 0.001-inch increments, for 
adjusting their cutting depths. 

Dimpling Dies

Dimpling is done with a male and female die (punch and die 
set). The male die has a guide the size of the rivet hole and 
with the same degree of countersink as the rivet. The female 
die has a hole with a corresponding degree of countersink 
into which the male guide fits.

Power Tools

The most common power tools used in riveting are the 
pneumatic rivet gun, rivet squeezers, and the microshaver.

Pneumatic Rivet Gun

The pneumatic rivet gun is the most common rivet 
upsetting tool used in airframe repair work. It is available 
in many sizes and types. [Figure 4-86] The manufacturer’s 
recommended capacity for each gun is usually stamped on 
the barrel. Pneumatic guns operate on air pressure of 90 
to 100 pounds per square inch and are used in conjunction 
with interchangeable rivet sets. Each set is designed to fit 
the specific type of rivet and the location of the work. The 
shank of the set is designed to fit into the rivet gun. An air-
driven hammer inside the barrel of the gun supplies force to 
buck the rivet.

Slow hitting rivet guns that strike from 900 to 2,500 blows 
per minute are the most common type. [Figure 4-87] These 
blows are slow enough to be easily controlled and heavy 
enough to do the job. These guns are sized by the largest rivet 
size continuously driven with size often based on the Chicago 
Pneumatic Company’s old “X” series. A 4X gun (dash 8 or 1⁄4 


4-38

Movement of air during forward stroke
Movement of air during rearward stroke

Blank rivet set

Beehive spring set retainer

Piston Set sleeve

CylinderExhaust deflector

Sliding valve

Throttle, trigger

Throttle lever

Throttle valve

Air path

Throttle tube

Bushing

Regulator adjustment screw

Figure 4-87. Components of a rivet gun. 

rivet) is used for normal work. The less powerful 3X gun is 
used for smaller rivets in thinner structure. 7X guns are used 
for large rivets in thicker structures. A rivet gun should upset  
a rivet in 1 to 3 seconds. With practice, an aircraft technician 
learns the length of time needed to hold down the trigger. 

A rivet gun with the correct header (rivet set) must be held 
snugly against the rivet head and perpendicular to the surface 
while a bucking bar of the proper weight is held against the 
opposite end. The force of the gun must be absorbed by the 
bucking bar and not the structure being riveted. When the 
gun is triggered, the rivet is driven. 

Always make sure the correct rivet header and the retaining 
spring are installed. Test the rivet gun on a piece of wood 
and adjust the air valve to a setting that is comfortable for 
the operator. The driving force of the rivet gun is adjusted by 
a needle valve on the handle. Adjustments should never be 
tested against anything harder than a wooden block to avoid 
header damage. If the adjustment fails to provide the best 
driving force, a different sized gun is needed. A gun that is 
too powerful is hard to control and may damage the work. 

On the other hand, if the gun is too light, it may work harden 
the rivet before the head can be fully formed.

The riveting action should start slowly and be one continued 
burst. If the riveting starts too fast, the rivet header might 
slip off the rivet and damage the rivet (smiley) or damage 
the skin (eyebrow). Try to drive the rivets within 3 seconds, 
because the rivet will work harden if the driving process 
takes too long. The dynamic of the driving process has the 
gun hitting, or vibrating, the rivet and material, which causes 
the bar to bounce, or countervibrate. These opposing blows 
(low frequency vibrations) squeeze the rivet, causing it to 
swell and then form the upset head. 

Some precautions to be observed when using a rivet gun are:

1. Never point a rivet gun at anyone at any time. A rivet 
gun should be used for one purpose only: to drive or 
install rivets.

2. Never depress the trigger mechanism unless the set is 
held tightly against a block of wood or a rivet.

3. Always disconnect the air hose from the rivet gun 
when it is not in use for any appreciable length of time.


4-39

Figure 4-88. Rivet headers.
Figure 4-89. Microshaver. 

While traditional tooling has changed little in the past 60 
years, significant changes have been made in rivet gun 
ergonomics. Reduced vibration rivet guns and bucking bars 
have been developed to reduce the incidence of carpal tunnel 
syndrome and enhance operator comfort. 

Rivet Sets/Headers

Pneumatic guns are used in conjunction with interchangeable 
rivet sets or headers. Each is designed to fit the type of rivet 
and location of the work. The shank of the rivet header is 
designed to fit into the rivet gun. An appropriate header must 
be a correct match for the rivet being driven. The working 
face of a header should be properly designed and smoothly 
polished. They are made of forged steel, heat treated to be 
tough but not too brittle. Flush headers come in various sizes. 
Smaller ones concentrate the driving force in a small area for 
maximum efficiency. Larger ones spread the driving force 
over a larger area and are used for the riveting of thin skins.

Nonflush headers should fit to contact about the center two-
thirds of the rivet head. They must be shallow enough to allow 
slight upsetting of the head in driving and some misalignment 
without eyebrowing the riveted surface. Care must be taken to 
match the size of the rivet. A header that is too small marks 
the rivet; while one too large marks the material.

Rivet headers are made in a variety of styles. [Figure 4-88] The 
short, straight header is best when the gun can be brought 
close to the work. Offset headers may be used to reach rivets 
in obstructed places. Long headers are sometimes necessary 
when the gun cannot be brought close to the work due to 
structural interference. Rivet headers should be kept clean.

Compression Riveting

Compression riveting (squeezing) is of limited value because 
this method of riveting can be used only over the edges of 
sheets or assemblies where conditions permit, and where the 
reach of the rivet squeezer is deep enough. The three types 

of rivet squeezers—hand, pneumatic, and pneudraulic—
operate on the same principles. In the hand rivet squeezer, 
compression is supplied by hand pressure; in the pneumatic 
rivet squeezer, by air pressure; and in the pneudraulic, 
by a combination of air and hydraulic pressure. One jaw 
is stationary and serves as a bucking bar, the other jaw is 
movable and does the upsetting. Riveting with a squeezer is 
a quick method and requires only one operator.

These riveters are equipped with either a C-yoke or an 
alligator yoke in various sizes to accommodate any size of 
rivet. The working capacity of a yoke is measured by its gap 
and its reach. The gap is the distance between the movable 
jaw and the stationary jaw; the reach is the inside length 
of the throat measured from the center of the end sets. End 
sets for rivet squeezers serve the same purpose as rivet sets 
for pneumatic rivet guns and are available with the same 
type heads, which are interchangeable to suit any type of 
rivet head. One part of each set is inserted in the stationary 
jaw, while the other part is placed in the movable jaws. 
The manufactured head end set is placed on the stationary 
jaw whenever possible. During some operations, it may be 
necessary to reverse the end sets, placing the manufactured 
head end set on the movable jaw.

Microshavers

A microshaver is used if the smoothness of the material (such 
as skin) requires that all countersunk rivets be driven within 
a specific tolerance. [Figure 4-89] This tool has a cutter, a 
stop, and two legs or stabilizers. The cutting portion of the 
microshaver is inside the stop. The depth of the cut can be 
adjusted by pulling outward on the stop and turning it in 
either direction (clockwise for deeper cuts). The marks on 
the stop permit adjustments of 0.001 inch. If the microshaver 
is adjusted and held correctly, it can cut the head of a 
countersunk rivet to within 0.002 inch without damaging 
the surrounding material. 


4-40

3/32 (0.0937)

1/8 (0.125)

5/32 (0.1562)

3/16 (0.1875)

1/4 (0.250)

#40 (0.098)

#30 (0.1285)

#21 (0.159)

#11 (0.191)

F (0.257)

3/32

1/8

5/32

3/16

1/4

Rivet Diameter (in)
Drill Size

Pilot Final

Figure 4-90. Drill sizes for standard rivets. 

Adjustments should always be made first on scrap material. 
When correctly adjusted, the microshaver leaves a small 
round dot about the size of a pinhead on the microshaved 
rivet. It may occasionally be necessary to shave rivets, 
normally restricted to MS20426 head rivets, after driving 
to obtain the required flushness. Shear head rivets should 
never be shaved. 

Riveting Procedure 
The riveting procedure consists of transferring and preparing 
the hole, drilling, and driving the rivets. 

Hole Transfer 

Accomplish transfer of holes from a drilled part to another 
part by placing the second part over first and using established 
holes as a guide. Using an alternate method, scribe hole 
location through from drilled part onto part to be drilled, 
spot with a center punch, and drill.

Hole Preparation

It is very important that the rivet hole be of the correct size 
and shape and free from burrs. If the hole is too small, the 
protective coating is scratched from the rivet when the rivet 
is driven through the hole. If the hole is too large, the rivet 
does not fill the hole completely. When it is bucked, the joint 
does not develop its full strength, and structural failure may 
occur at that spot.

If countersinking is required, consider the thickness of the 
metal and adopt the countersinking method recommended for 
that thickness. If dimpling is required, keep hammer blows 
or dimpling pressures to a minimum so that no undue work 
hardening occurs in the surrounding area.

Drilling 

Rivet holes in repair may be drilled with either a light 
power drill or a hand drill. The standard shank twist drill is 
most commonly used. Drill bit sizes for rivet holes should 
be the smallest size that permits easy insertion of the rivet, 
approximately 0.003-inch greater than the largest tolerance 
of the shank diameter. The recommended clearance drill bits 
for the common rivet diameters are shown in Figure 4-90. 

Hole sizes for other fasteners are normally found on work 
documents, prints, or in manuals.

Before drilling, center punch all rivet locations. The center 
punch mark should be large enough to prevent the drill from 
slipping out of position, yet it must not dent the surface  
surrounding the center punch mark. Place a bucking bar 
behind the metal during punching to help prevent denting. 
To make a rivet hole the correct size, first drill a slightly 
undersized hole (pilot hole). Ream the pilot hole with a twist 
drill of the appropriate size to obtain the required dimension.

To drill, proceed as follows:

1. Ensure the drill bit is the correct size and shape. 

2. Place the drill in the center-punched mark. When using 
a power drill, rotate the bit a few turns before starting 
the motor.

3. While drilling, always hold the drill at a 90º angle to 
the work or the curvature of the material. 

4. Avoid excessive pressure, let the drill bit do the 
cutting, and never push the drill bit through stock. 

5. Remove all burrs with a metal countersink or a file. 

6. Clean away all drill chips.

When holes are drilled through sheet metal, small burrs are 
formed around the edge of the hole. This is especially true 
when using a hand drill because the drill speed is slow and 
there is a tendency to apply more pressure per drill revolution. 
Remove all burrs with a burr remover or larger size drill bit 
before riveting.

Driving the Rivet

Although riveting equipment can be either stationary or 
portable, portable riveting equipment is the most common 
type of riveting equipment used to drive solid shank rivets 
in airframe repair work. 

Before driving any rivets into the sheet metal parts, be sure 
all holes line up perfectly, all shavings and burrs have been 
removed, and the parts to be riveted are securely fastened 
with temporary fasteners. Depending on the job, the riveting 
process may require one or two people. In solo riveting, the 
riveter holds a bucking bar with one hand and operates a 
riveting gun with the other.

If the job requires two aircraft technicians, a shooter, or 
gunner, and a bucker work together as a team to install rivets. 
An important component of team riveting is an efficient 
signaling system that communicates the status of the riveting 
process. This signaling system usually consists of tapping 
the bucking bar against the work and is often called the tap 


4-41

Preferred
countersinking

Permissible
countersinking

Unacceptable
countersinking

Figure 4-91. Countersinking dimensions.

code. One tap may mean not fully seated, hit it again, while 
two taps may mean good rivet, and three taps may mean bad 
rivet, remove and drive another. Radio sets are also available 
for communication between the technicians.

Once the rivet is installed, there should be no evidence of 
rotation of rivets or looseness of riveted parts. After the 
trimming operation, examine for tightness. Apply a force 
of 10 pounds to the trimmed stem. A tight stem is one 
indication of an acceptable rivet installation. Any degree of 
looseness indicates an oversize hole and requires replacement 
of the rivet with an oversize shank diameter rivet. A rivet 
installation is assumed satisfactory when the rivet head is 
seated snugly against the item to be retained (0.005-inch 
feeler gauge should not go under rivet head for more than 
one-half the circumference) and the stem is proved tight.

Countersunk Rivets
An improperly made countersink reduces the strength of a 
flush-riveted joint and may even cause failure of the sheet or 
the rivet head. The two methods of countersinking commonly 
used for flush riveting in aircraft construction and repair are:

• Machine or drill countersinking.

• Dimpling or press countersinking.

The proper method for any particular application depends on 
the thickness of the parts to be riveted, the height and angle 
of the countersunk head, the tools available, and accessibility.

Countersinking

When using countersunk rivets, it is necessary to make a 
conical recess in the skin for the head. The type of countersink 
required depends upon the relation of the thickness of the 
sheets to the depth of the rivet head. Use the proper degree 
and diameter countersink and cut only deep enough for the 
rivet head and metal to form a flush surface.
 
Countersinking is an important factor in the design of fastener 
patterns, as the removal of material in the countersinking 
process necessitates an increase in the number of fasteners to 
assure the required load-transfer strength. If countersinking 
is done on metal below a certain thickness, a knife edge with 
less than the minimum bearing surface or actual enlarging of 
the hole may result. The edge distance required when using 
countersunk fasteners is greater than when universal head 
fasteners are used.

The general rule for countersinking and flush fastener 
installation procedures has been reevaluated in recent years 
because countersunk holes have been responsible for fatigue 
cracks in aircraft pressurized skin. In the past, the general rule 
for countersinking held that the fastener head must be contained 

within the outer sheet. A combination of countersinks too deep 
(creating a knife edge), number of pressurization cycles, 
fatigue, deterioration of bonding materials, and working 
fasteners caused a high stress concentration that resulted in 
skin cracks and fastener failures. In primary structure and 
pressurized skin repairs, some manufacturers are currently 
recommending the countersink depth be no more than 2⁄3 the 
outer sheet thickness or down to 0.020-inch minimum fastener 
shank depth, whichever is greater. Dimple the skin if it is too 
thin for machine countersinking. [Figure 4-91]

Keep the rivet high before driving to ensure the force of 
riveting is applied to the rivet and not to the skin. If the rivet 
is driven while it is flush or too deep, the surrounding skin 
is work hardened.

Countersinking Tools

While there are many types of countersink tools, the most 
commonly used has an included angle of 100°. Sometimes 
types of 82° or 120° are used to form countersunk wells. 
[Figure 4-84] A six-fluted countersink works best in 
aluminum. There are also four- and three-fluted countersinks, 
but those are harder to control from a chatter standpoint. A 
single-flute type, such as those manufactured by the Weldon 
Tool Company®, works best for corrosion-resistant steel. 
[Figure 4-92]


4-42

Figure 4-93. Hand squeezers.

Figure 4-92. Single-flute countersink.

The microstop countersink is the preferred countersinking 
tool. [Figure 4-85] It has an adjustable-sleeve cage that 
functions as a limit stop and holds the revolving countersink 
in a vertical position. Its threaded and replaceable cutters may 
have either a removable or an integral pilot that keeps the 
cutter centered in the hole. The pilot should be approximately 
0.002-inch smaller than the hole size. It is recommended 
to test adjustments on a piece of scrap material before 
countersinking repair or replacement parts.

Freehand countersinking is needed where a microstop 
countersink cannot fit. This method should be practiced on 
scrap material to develop the required skill. Holding the 
drill motor steady and perpendicular is as critical during this 
operation as when drilling.

Chattering is the most common problem encountered when 
countersinking. Some precautions that may eliminate or 
minimize chatter include:

• Use sharp tooling.

• Use a slow speed and steady firm pressure.

• Use a piloted countersink with a pilot approximately 
0.002-inch smaller than the hole.

• Use back-up material to hold the pilot steady when 
countersinking thin sheet material.

• Use a cutter with a different number of flutes.

• Pilot drill an undersized hole, countersink, and then 
enlarge the hole to final size.

Dimpling

Dimpling is the process of making an indentation or a 
dimple around a rivet hole to make the top of the head of 
a countersunk rivet flush with the surface of the metal. 
Dimpling is done with a male and female die, or forms, often 
called punch and die set. The male die has a guide the size of 
the rivet hole and is beveled to correspond to the degree of 
countersink of the rivet head. The female die has a hole into 
which the male guide fits and is beveled to a corresponding 
degree of countersink.

When dimpling, rest the female die on a solid surface. Then, 
place the material to be dimpled on the female die. Insert the 
male die in the hole to be dimpled and, with a hammer, strike 
the male die until the dimple is formed. Two or three solid 
hammer blows should be sufficient. A separate set of dies is 
necessary for each size of rivet and shape of rivet head. An 
alternate method is to use a countersunk head rivet instead 
of the regular male punch die, and a draw set instead of the 
female die, and hammer the rivet until the dimple is formed. 

Dimpling dies for light work can be used in portable 
pneumatic or hand squeezers. [Figure 4-93] If the dies are 
used with a squeezer, they must be adjusted accurately to the 
thickness of the sheet being dimpled. A table riveter is also 
used for dimpling thin skin material and installing rivets. 
[Figure 4-94]

Coin Dimpling

The coin dimpling, or coin pressing, method uses a 
countersink rivet as the male dimpling die. Place the female 
die in the usual position and back it with a bucking bar. Place 
the rivet of the required type into the hole and strike the rivet 
with a pneumatic riveting hammer. Coin dimpling should 
be used only when the regular male die is broken or not 
available. Coin pressing has the distinct disadvantage of the 


4-43

1 2 3

Gun draw tool Flat gun die

Bucking bar

Male die

Female die

Hole
Dimpled hole

Figure 4-94. Table riveter.

Figure 4-95. Dimpling techniques.

This top sheet is dimpled

Thick bottom material is countersunk

Figure 4-96. Predimple and countersink method.

rivet hole needing to be drilled to correct rivet size before the 
dimpling operation is accomplished. Since the metal stretches 
during the dimpling operation, the hole becomes enlarged and 
the rivet must be swelled slightly before driving to produce 
a close fit. Because the rivet head causes slight distortions in 
the recess, and these are characteristic only to that particular 
rivet head, it is wise to drive the same rivet that was used as 
the male die during the dimpling process. Do not substitute 
another rivet, either of the same size or a size larger.

Radius Dimpling

Radius dimpling uses special die sets that have a radius 
and are often used with stationary or portable squeezers. 
Dimpling removes no metal and, due to the nestling effect, 
gives a stronger joint than the non-flush type. A dimpled 
joint reduces the shear loading on the rivet and places more 
load on the riveted sheets.

NOTE: Dimpling is also done for flush bolts and other  
flush fasteners.

Dimpling is required for sheets that are thinner than the 
minimum specified thickness for countersinking. However, 
dimpling is not limited to thin materials. Heavier parts may 
be dimpled without cracking by specialized hot dimpling 
equipment. The temper of the material, rivet size, and 
available equipment are all factors to be considered in 
dimpling. [Figure 4-95]

Hot Dimpling

Hot dimpling is the process that uses heated dimpling dies to 
ensure the metal flows better during the dimpling process. Hot 
dimpling is often performed with large stationary equipment 
available in a sheet metal shop. The metal being used is 
an important factor because each metal presents different 
dimpling problems. For example, 2024-T3 aluminum alloy 
can be satisfactorily dimpled either hot or cold, but may crack 

in the vicinity of the dimple after cold dimpling because of 
hard spots in the metal. Hot dimpling prevents such cracking. 

7075-T6 aluminum alloys are always hot dimpled. 
Magnesium alloys also must be hot dimpled because, like 
7075-T6, they have low formability qualities. Titanium is 
another metal that must be hot dimpled because it is tough 
and resists forming. The same temperature and dwell time 
used to hot dimple 7075-T6 is used for titanium. 

100° Combination Predimple and Countersink Method

Metals of different thicknesses are sometimes joined 
by a combination of dimpling and countersinking. 
[Figure 4-96] A countersink well made to receive a dimple 
is called a subcountersink. These are most often seen where 


4-44

T
o

p
 v

ie
w

S
id

e 
vi

ew
B

o
tt

o
m

 v
ie

w

A. Driven correctly B. Unsteady tool C. Driven excessively D. Separation of sheets E. Unsteady rivet set F. Excessive shank length

Imperfection Cause Remedy Action

None  

Cut head  
 
Excessively flat head, 
resultant head cracks

Sheet separation

Sloping head

Buckled shank 

None  

Improperly held tools

Excessive driving, too much pressure on
bucking bar

Work not held firmly together and rivet
shank swelled

a. Bucking bar not held firmly
b. Bucking bar permitted to slide and
    bounce over the rivet

Improper rivet length, and E above

None  

Hold riveting tools firmly against work

Improve riveting technique

Fasten work firmly together to prevent
slipping

Hold bucking bar firmly without too
much pressure

E above and rivet of proper length

None  

Replace rivet

Replace rivet

Replace rivet

Replace rivet

Replace rivet

A

B

C

D

E

F

Damaged
head

Swelled shank

Sloping head Buckled shankCracks

Figure 4-97. Rivet defects.

a thin web is attached to heavy structure. It is also used on 
thin gap seals, wear strips, and repairs for worn countersinks.

Dimpling Inspection

To determine the quality of a dimple, it is necessary to make 
a close visual inspection. Several features must be checked. 
The rivet head should fit flush and there should be a sharp 
break from the surface into the dimple. The sharpness of the 
break is affected by dimpling pressure and metal thickness. 
Selected dimples should be checked by inserting a fastener to 
make sure that the flushness requirements are met. Cracked 
dimples are caused by poor dies, rough holes, or improper 
heating. Two types of cracks may form during dimpling:

• Radial cracks—start at the edge and spread outward as 
the metal within the dimple stretches. They are most 
common in 2024-T3. A rough hole or a dimple that 
is too deep causes such cracks. A small tolerance is 
usually allowed for radial cracks.

• Circumferential cracks—downward bending into the 
draw die causes tension stresses in the upper portion 
of the metal. Under some conditions, a crack may 
be created that runs around the edge of the dimple. 
Such cracks do not always show since they may be 

underneath the cladding. When found, they are cause 
for rejection. These cracks are most common in hot-
dimpled 7075 T6 aluminum alloy material. The usual 
cause is insufficient dimpling heat.

Evaluating the Rivet
To obtain high structural efficiency in the manufacture and 
repair of aircraft, an inspection must be made of all rivets 
before the part is put in service. This inspection consists of 
examining both the shop and manufactured heads and the 
surrounding skin and structural parts for deformities. A scale 
or rivet gauge can be used to check the condition of the upset 
rivet head to see that it conforms to the proper requirements. 
Deformities in the manufactured head can be detected by the 
trained eye alone. [Figure 4-97]

Some common causes of unsatisfactory riveting are improper 
bucking, rivet set slipping off or being held at the wrong 
angle, and rivet holes or rivets of the wrong size. Additional 
causes for unsatisfactory riveting are countersunk rivets not 
flush with the well, work not properly fastened together 
during riveting, the presence of burrs, rivets too hard, too 
much or too little driving, and rivets out of line.


4-45

Occasionally, during an aircraft structural repair, it is wise 
to examine adjacent parts to determine the true condition 
of neighboring rivets. In doing so, it may be necessary to 
remove the paint. The presence of chipped or cracked paint 
around the heads may indicate shifted or loose rivets. Look 
for tipped or loose rivet heads. If the heads are tipped or if 
rivets are loose, they show up in groups of several consecutive 
rivets and probably tipped in the same direction. If heads that 
appear to be tipped are not in groups and are not tipped in 
the same direction, tipping may have occurred during some 
previous installation.

Inspect rivets known to have been critically loaded, but 
that show no visible distortion, by drilling off the head and 
carefully punching out the shank. If, upon examination, the 
shank appears joggled and the holes in the sheet misaligned, 
the rivet has failed in shear. In that case, try to determine 
what is causing the shearing stress and take the necessary 
corrective action. Flush rivets that show head slippage within 
the countersink or dimple, indicating either sheet bearing 
failure or rivet shear failure, must be removed for inspection 
and replacement.

Joggles in removed rivet shanks indicate partial shear failure. 
Replace these rivets with the next larger size. Also, if the rivet 
holes show elongation, replace the rivets with the next larger 
size. Sheet failures such as tear-outs, cracks between rivets, 
and the like usually indicate damaged rivets. The complete 
repair of the joint may require replacement of the rivets with 
the next larger size.

The general practice of replacing a rivet with the next larger 
size (1⁄32-inch greater diameter) is necessary to obtain the 
proper joint strength of rivet and sheet when the original rivet 
hole is enlarged. If the rivet in an elongated hole is replaced 
by a rivet of the same size, its ability to carry its share of the 
shear load is impaired and joint weakness results.

Removal of Rivets
When a rivet has to be replaced, remove it carefully to retain 
the rivet hole’s original size and shape. If removed correctly, 
the rivet does not need to be replaced with one of the next 
larger size. Also, if the rivet is not removed properly, the 
strength of the joint may be weakened and the replacement 
of rivets made more difficult.

When removing a rivet, work on the manufactured head. It 
is more symmetrical about the shank than the shop head, and 
there is less chance of damaging the rivet hole or the material 
around it. To remove rivets, use hand tools, a power drill, or 
a combination of both. 

The procedure for universal or protruding head rivet removal 
is as  follows:

1. File a flat area on the head of the rivet and center punch 
the flat surface for drilling.

 NOTE: On thin metal, back up the rivet on the upset 
head when center punching to avoid depressing  
the metal.

2. Use a drill bit one size smaller than the rivet shank to 
drill out the rivet head. 

 NOTE: When using a power drill, set the drill on the 
rivet and rotate the chuck several revolutions by hand 
before turning on the power. This procedure helps the 
drill cut a good starting spot and eliminates the chance 
of the drill slipping off and tracking across the metal. 

3. Drill the rivet to the depth of its head, while holding 
the drill at a 90° angle. Do not drill too deeply, as the 
rivet shank will then turn with the drill and tear the 
surrounding metal.

 NOTE: The rivet head often breaks away and climbs 
the drill, which is a signal to withdraw the drill.

4. If the rivet head does not come loose of its own accord, 
insert a drift punch into the hole and twist slightly to 
either side until the head comes off.

5. Drive the remaining rivet shank out with a drift punch 
slightly smaller than the shank diameter. 

On thin metal or unsupported structures, support the sheet 
with a bucking bar while driving out the shank. If the shank is 
unusually tight after the rivet head is removed, drill the rivet 
about two-thirds through the thickness of the material and then 
drive the rest of it out with a drift punch. Figure 4-98 shows 
the preferred procedure for removing universal rivets.

The procedure for the removal of countersunk rivets is the 
same as described above except no filing is necessary. Be 
careful to avoid elongation of the dimpled or the countersunk 
holes. The rivet head should be drilled to approximately one-
half the thickness of the top sheet. The dimple in 2117–T 
rivets usually eliminates the necessity of filing and center 
punching the rivet head.

To remove a countersunk or flush head rivet, you must:

1. Select a drill about 0.003-inch smaller than the rivet 
shank diameter. 

2. Drill into the exact center of the rivet head to the 
approximate depth of the head.


4-46

1. File a flat area on manufactured head 2. Center punch flat

3. Drill through head using drill one
 size smaller than rivet shank

4. Remove weakened head with 
 machine punch

5. Punch out rivet with machine punch

Rivet Removal

Remove rivets by drilling off the head and punching out the shank as illustrated.
1. File a flat area on the manufactured head of non-flush rivets.
2. Place a block of wood or a bucking bar under both flush and nonflush rivets when center punching the manufactured head.
3. Use a drill that is 1/32 (0.0312) inch smaller than the rivet shank to drill through the head of the rivet. Ensure the drilling
 operation does not damage the skin or cut the sides of the rivet hole.
4. Insert a drift punch into the hole drilled in the rivet and tilt the punch to break off the rivet head.
5. Using a drift punch and hammer, drive out the rivet shank. Support the opposite side of the structure to prevent 
 structural damage.

Figure 4-98. Rivet removal. 

3. Remove the head by breaking it off. Use a punch as 
a lever.

4. Punch out the shank. Use a suitable backup, preferably 
wood (or equivalent), or a dedicated backup block. If 
the shank does not come out easily, use a small drill 
and drill through the shank. Be careful not to elongate 
the hole.

Replacing Rivets
Replace rivets with those of the same size and strength 
whenever possible. If the rivet hole becomes enlarged, 
deformed, or otherwise damaged, drill or ream the hole for 
the next larger size rivet. Do not replace a rivet with a type 
having lower strength properties, unless the lower strength 

is adequately compensated by an increase in size or a greater 
number of rivets. It is acceptable to replace 2017 rivets of 
3⁄16-inch diameter or less, and 2024 rivets of 5⁄32-inch diameter 
or less with 2117 rivets for general repairs, provided the 
replacement rivets are 1⁄32-inch greater in diameter than the 
rivets they replace.

National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics
(NACA) Method of Double Flush Riveting
A rivet installation technique known as the National Advisory 
Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) method has primary 
applications in fuel tank areas. [Figure 4-99] To make  
a NACA rivet installation, the shank is upset into a 82° 
countersink. In driving, the gun may be used on either the 


4-47

Rivet factory head

Shop head formed in countersink

Figure 4-99. NACA riveting method. 

Figure 4-100. Assorted fasteners.

head or shank side. The upsetting is started with light blows, 
then the force increased and the gun or bar moved on the 
shank end so as to form a head inside the countersink well. 
If desired, the upset head may be shaved flush after driving. 
If utilizing this method, it is important to reference the 
manufacturer’s instructions for repair or replacement.

Special Purpose Fasteners
Special purpose fasteners are designed for applications in 
which fastener strength, ease of installation, or temperature 
properties of the fastener require consideration. Solid shank 
rivets have been the preferred construction method for metal 
aircraft for many years because they fill up the hole, which 
results in good load transfer, but they are not always ideal. 
For example, the attachment of many nonstructural parts 
(aircraft interior furnishings, flooring, deicing boots, etc.) 
do not need the full strength of solid shank rivets.

To install solid shank rivets, the aircraft technician must 
have access to both sides of a riveted structure or structural 
part. There are many places on an aircraft where this access 
is impossible or where limited space does not permit the use
of a bucking bar. In these instances, it is not possible to use 
solid shank rivets, and special fasteners have been designed 
that can be bucked from the front. [Figure 4-100]  There are 
also areas of high loads, high fatigue, and bending on aircraft. 
Although the shear loads of riveted joints are very good, the 
tension, or clamp-up, loads are less than ideal. 

Special purpose fasteners are sometimes lighter than solid 
shank rivets, yet strong enough for their intended use. These 
fasteners are manufactured by several corporations and 
have unique characteristics that require special installation 
tools, special installation procedures, and special removal 
procedures. Because these fasteners are often inserted in 
locations where one head, usually the shop head, cannot be 
seen, they are called blind rivets or blind fasteners.

Typically, the locking characteristics of a blind rivet are not 
as good as a driven rivet. Therefore, blind rivets are usually 
not used when driven rivets can be installed. Blind rivets 
shall not be used: 

1. In fluid-tight areas.

2. On aircraft in air intake areas where rivet parts may 
be ingested by the engine.

3. On aircraft control surfaces, hinges, hinge brackets, 
flight control actuating systems, wing attachment 
fittings, landing gear fittings, on floats or amphibian 
hulls below the water level, or other heavily stressed 
locations on the aircraft.

NOTE: For metal repairs to the airframe, the use of blind 
rivets must be specifically authorized by the airframe 
manufacturer or approved by a representative of the Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA).

Blind Rivets
The first blind fasteners were introduced in 1940 by the 
Cherry Rivet Company (now Cherry® Aerospace), and the 
aviation industry quickly adopted them. The past decades 
have seen a proliferation of blind fastening systems based on 
the original concept, which consists of a tubular rivet with 
a fixed head and a hollow sleeve. Inserted within the rivet’s 
core is a stem that is enlarged or serrated on its exposed end 
when activated by a pulling-type rivet gun. The lower end 
of the stem extends beyond the inner sheet of metal. This 
portion contains a tapered joining portion and a blind head 
that has a larger diameter than the stem or the sleeve of the 
tubular rivet. 

When the pulling force of the rivet gun forces the blind head 
upward into the sleeve, its stem upsets or expands the lower 
end of the sleeve into a tail. This presses the inner sheet 
upward and closes any space that might have existed between 
it and the outer sheet. Since the exposed head of the rivet is 
held tightly against the outer sheet by the rivet gun, the sheets 
of metal are clamped, or clinched, together. 


4-48

Figure 4-101. Friction-lock blind rivet.

NOTE: Fastener manufacturers use different terminology to 
describe the parts of the blind rivet. The terms “mandrel,” 
“spindle,” and “stem” are often used interchangeably. For 
clarity, the word “stem” is used in this handbook and refers 
to the piece that is inserted into the hollow sleeve.

Friction-Locked Blind Rivets

Standard self-plugging blind rivets consist of a hollow sleeve 
and a stem with increased diameter in the plug section. 
The blind head is formed as the stem is pulled into the 
sleeve. Friction-locked blind rivets have a multiple-piece 
construction and rely on friction to lock the stem to the 
sleeve. As the stem is drawn up into the rivet shank, the 
stem portion upsets the shank on the blind side, forming a 
plug in the hollow center of the rivet. The excess portion of 
the stem breaks off at a groove due to the continued pulling 
action of the rivet gun. Metals used for these rivets are 2117-
T4 and 5056-F aluminum alloy. Monel® is used for special 
applications.

Many friction-locked blind rivet center stems fall out due to 
vibration, which greatly reduces its shear strength. To combat 
that problem, most friction-lock blind rivets are replaced by 
the mechanical-lock, or stem-lock, type of blind fasteners. 
However, some types, such as the Cherry SPR® 3⁄32-inch 
Self-Plugging Rivet, are ideal for securing nutplates located 
in inaccessible and hard-to-reach areas where bucking or 
squeezing of solid rivets is unacceptable. [Figure 4-102]

Friction-lock blind rivets are less expensive than mechanical-
lock blind rivets and are sometimes used for nonstructural 
applications. Inspection of friction-lock blind rivets is 

visual. A more detailed discussion on how to inspect riveted 
joints can be found in the section, General Repair Practices. 
Removal of friction-lock blind rivets consists of punching out 
the friction-lock stem and then treating it like any other rivet.

Mechanical-Lock Blind Rivets

The self-plugging, mechanical-lock blind rivet was developed 
to prevent the problem of losing the center stem due to 
vibration. This rivet has a device on the puller or rivet head 
that locks the center stem into place when installed. Bulbed, 
self-plugging, mechanically-locked blind rivets form a large, 
blind head that provides higher strength in thin sheets when 
installed. They may be used in applications where the blind 
head is formed against a dimpled sheet. 

Manufacturers such as Cherry® Aerospace (CherryMAX®, 
CherryLOCK®, Cherry SST®) and Alcoa Fastening Systems 
(Huck-Clinch®, HuckMax®, Unimatic®) make many 
variations of this of blind rivet. While similar in design, the 
tooling for these rivets is often not interchangeable. 

The CherryMAX® Bulbed blind rivet is one of the earlier 
types of mechanical-lock blind rivets developed. Their main 
advantage is the ability to replace a solid shank rivet size 
for size. The CherryMAX® Bulbed blind rivet consists of 
four parts:

1. A fully serrated stem with break notch, shear ring, and 
integral grip adjustment cone.

2. A driving anvil to ensure a visible mechanical lock 
with each fastener installation.

3. A separate, visible, and inspectable locking collar that 
mechanically locks the stem to the rivet sleeve.

4. A rivet sleeve with recess in the head to receive the 
locking collar. 

It is called a bulbed fastener due to its large blind side 
bearing surface, developed during the installation process. 
These rivets are used in thin sheet applications and for use 
in materials that may be damaged by other types of blind 
rivets. This rivet features a safe-lock locking collar for more 
reliable joint integrity. The rough end of the retained stem 
in the center on the manufactured head must never be filed 
smooth because it weakens the strength of the lockring, and 
the center stem could fall out.

CherryMAX® bulbed rivets are available in three head styles: 
universal, 100° countersunk, and 100° reduced shear head 
styles. Their lengths are measured in increments of 1⁄16 inch. 
It is important to select a rivet with a length related to the 
grip length of the metal being joined. This blind rivet can 
be installed using either the Cherry® G750A or the newly 
released Cherry® G800 hand riveters, or either the pneumatic-


4-49

1 2 3 4

The CherryMAX® rivet is 
inserted into the prepared 
hole. The pulling head 
(installation tool) is slipped 
over the rivet’s stem. 
Applying a firm, steady 
pressure, which seats the 
rivet head, the installation 
tool is then actuated.

The pulling head holds the 
rivet sleeve in place as it 
begins to pull the rivet stem 
into the rivet sleeve. This 
pulling action causes the 
stem shear ring to upset the 
rivet sleeve and form the 
bulbed blind head.

The continued pulling action of 
the installation tool causes the 
stem shear ring to shear from 
the main body of the stem as 
the stem continues to move 
through the rivet sleeve. This 
action allows the fastener to 
accommodate a minimum of 
1/16" variation in structure 
thickness. The locking collar 
then contacts the driving anvil. 
As the stem continues to be 
pulled by the action of the 
installation tool, the Safe-Lock 
locking collar deforms into the 
rivet sleeve head recess.

The safe-lock locking collar 
fills the rivet sleeve head 
recess, locking the stem and 
rivet sleeve securely together. 
Continued pulling by the 
installation tool causes the 
stem to fracture at the break 
notch, providing a flush, 
burr-free, inspectable 
installation.

Figure 4-102. CherryMax® installation procedure.

Bulbed blind head

Pulling stem

Driving anvil

Rivet sleeve

Safe-lock locking collar

Figure 4-103. CherryMAX® rivet.

hydraulic G704B or G747 CherryMAX® power tools. For 
installation, please refer to Figure 4-102. 

The CherryMAX® mechanical-lock blind rivet is popular 
with general aviation repair shops because it features the 
one tool concept to install three standard rivet diameters and 
their oversize counterparts. [Figure 4-103] CherryMAX® 

rivets are available in four nominal diameters: 1⁄8, 5⁄32, 3⁄16, and 
1⁄4-inch and three oversized diameters and four head styles: 
universal, 100° flush head, 120° flush head, and NAS1097 
flush head. This rivet consists of a blind header, hollow rivet 
shell, locking (foil) collar, driving anvil, and pulling stem 
complete with wrapped locking collar. The rivet sleeve and 


4-50

the driving washer blind bulbed header takes up the extended 
shank and forms the bucktail.

The stem and rivet sleeve work as an assembly to provide 
radial expansion and a large bearing footprint on the blind 
side of the fastened surface. The lock collar ensures that the 
stem and sleeve remain assembled during joint loading and 
unloading. Rivet sleeves are made from 5056 aluminum, 
Monel® and INCO 600. The stems are made from alloy 
steel, CRES, and INCO® X-750. CherryMAX® rivets have 
an ultimate shear strength ranging from 50 KSI to 75 KSI.
 
Removal of Mechanically-Locked Blind Rivets

Mechanically-locked blind rivets are a challenge to remove 
because they are made from strong, hard metals. Lack of 
access poses yet another problem for the aviation technician. 
Designed for and used in difficult to reach locations means 
there is often no access to the blind side of the rivet or any way 
to provide support for the sheet metal surrounding the rivet’s 
location when the aviation technician attempts removal.

The stem is mechanically locked by a small lock ring that 
needs to be removed first. Use a small center drill to provide 
a guide for a larger drill on top of the rivet stem and drill 
away the upper portion of the stem to destroy the lock. Try 
to remove the lock ring or use a prick punch or center punch 
to drive the stem down a little and remove the lock ring. 
After the lock ring is removed, the stem can be driven out 
with a drive punch. After the stem is removed, the rivet can 
be drilled out in the same way as a solid rivet. If possible, 
support the back side of the rivet with a backup block to 
prevent damage to the aircraft skin. 

Pin Fastening Systems (High-Shear Fasteners) 
A pin fastening system, or high-shear pin rivet, is a two-piece 
fastener that consists of a threaded pin and a collar. The metal 
collar is swaged onto the grooved end, effecting a firm tight 
fit. They are essentially threadless bolts.

High-shear rivets are installed with standard bucking bars 
and pneumatic riveting hammers. They require the use 
of a special gun set that incorporates collar swaging and 
trimming and a discharge port through which excess collar 
material is discharged. A separate size set is required for each  
shank diameter.

Installation of High-Shear Fasteners

Prepare holes for pin rivets with the same care as for other 
close tolerance rivets or bolts. At times, it may be necessary 
to spot-face the area under the head of the pin to ensure the 
head of the rivet fits tightly against the material. The spot-
faced area should be 1⁄16-inch larger in diameter than the 
head diameter. Pin rivets may be driven from either end. 

Procedures for driving a pin rivet from the collar end are:

1. Insert the rivet in the hole.

2. Place a bucking bar against the rivet head.

3. Slip the collar over the protruding rivet end.

4. Place previously selected rivet set and gun over the 
collar. Align the gun until it is perpendicular to the 
material.

5. Depress the trigger on the gun, applying pressure to 
the rivet collar. This action causes the rivet collar to 
swage into the groove on the rivet end.

6. Continue the driving action until the collar is properly 
formed and excess collar material is trimmed off.

Procedures for driving a pin rivet from the head end are:

1. Insert the rivet in the hole.

2. Slip the collar over the protruding end of rivet.

3. Insert the correct size gun rivet set in a bucking bar 
and place the set against the collar of the rivet.

4. Apply pressure against the rivet head with a flush rivet 
set and pneumatic riveting hammer.

5. Continue applying pressure until the collar is formed 
in the groove and excess collar material is trimmed 
off.

Inspection

Pin rivets should be inspected on both sides of the material. 
The head of the rivet should not be marred and should fit 
tightly against the material.

Removal of Pin Rivets

The conventional method of removing rivets by drilling off 
the head may be utilized on either end of the pin rivet. Center 
punching is recommended prior to applying drilling pressure. 
In some cases, alternate methods may be needed:

• Grind a chisel edge on a small pin punch to a blade 
width of 1⁄8-inch. Place this tool at right angles to the 
collar and drive with a hammer to split the collar down 
one side. Repeat the operation on the opposite side. 
Then, with the chisel blade, pry the collar from the 
rivet. Tap the rivet out of the hole.

• Use a special hollow punch having one or more blades 
placed to split the collar. Pry the collar from the groove 
and tap out the rivet. 

• Sharpen the cutting blades of a pair of nippers. Cut 
the collar in two pieces or use nippers at right angles 
to the rivet and cut through the small neck. 


4-51

Figure 4-104. Hi-Lok®.

• A hollow-mill collar cutter can be used in a power hand 
drill to cut away enough collar material to permit the 
rivet to be tapped out of the work.

The high-shear pin rivet family includes fasteners, such as 
the Hi-Lok®, Hi-Tigue®, and Hi-Lite® made by Hi-Shear 
Corporation and the CherryBUCK® 95 KSI One-Piece Shear 
Pin and Cherry E-Z Buck® Shear Pin made by Cherry® 
Aerospace.

Hi-Lok® Fastening System

The threaded end of the Hi-Lok® two-piece fastener contains 
a hexagonal shaped recess. [Figure 4-104] The hex tip of an 
Allen wrench engages the recess to prevent rotation of the 
pin while the collar is being installed. The pin is designed 
in two basic head styles. For shear applications, the pin is 
made in countersunk style and in a compact protruding head 
style. For tension applications, the MS24694 countersunk and 
regular protruding head styles are available.

The self-locking, threaded Hi-Lok® collar has an internal 
counterbore at the base to accommodate variations in 
material thickness. At the opposite end of the collar is a 
wrenching device that is torqued by the driving tool until it 
shears off during installation, leaving the lower portion of 
the collar seated with the proper torque without additional 
torque inspection. This shear-off point occurs when a 
predetermined preload or clamp-up is attained in the fastener 
during installation.

The advantages of Hi-Lok® two-piece fastener include its 
lightweight, high fatigue resistance, high strength, and its 
inability to be overtorqued. The pins, made from alloy steel, 
corrosion-resistant steel, or titanium alloy, come in many 
standard and oversized shank diameters. The collars are made 
of aluminum alloy, corrosion-resistant steel, or alloy steel. 
The collars have wrenching flats, fracture point, threads, and 
a recess. The wrenching flats are used to install the collar. 
The fracture point has been designed to allow the wrenching 

flats to shear when the proper torque has been reached. The 
threads match the threads of the pins and have been formed 
into an ellipse that is distorted to provide the locking action. 
The recess serves as a built-in washer. This area contains a 
portion of the shank and the transition area of the fastener.

The hole shall be prepared so that the maximum interference 
fit does not exceed 0.002-inch. This avoids build up of 
excessive internal stresses in the work adjacent to the hole. 
The Hi-Lok® pin has a slight radius under its head to increase 
fatigue life. After drilling, deburr the edge of the hole to allow 
the head to seat fully in the hole. The Hi-Lok® is installed in 
interference fit holes for aluminum structure and a clearance 
fit for steel, titanium, and composite materials.

Hi-Tigue® Fastening System

The Hi-Tigue® fastener offers all of the benefits of the Hi-
Lok® fastening system along with a unique bead design that 
enhances the fatigue performance of the structure making 
it ideal for situations that require a controlled interference 
fit. The Hi-Tigue® fastener assembly consists of a pin and 
collar. These pin rivets have a radius at the transition area. 
During installation in an interference fit hole, the radius area 
will “cold work” the hole. These fastening systems can be 
easily confused, and visual reference should not be used for 
identification. Use part numbers to identify these fasteners.

Hi-Lite® Fastening System

The Hi-Lite® fastener is similar in design and principle to 
the Hi-Lok® fastener, but the Hi-Lite® fastener has a shorter 
transition area between the shank and the first load-bearing 
thread. Hi-Lite® has approximately one less thread. All Hi-
Lite® fasteners are made of titanium.

These differences reduce the weight of the Hi-Lite® fastener 
without lessening the shear strength, but the Hi-Lite® 
clamping forces are less than that of a Hi-Lok® fastener. 
The Hi-Lite® collars are also different and thus are not 
interchangeable with Hi-Lok® collars. Hi-Lite® fasteners can 
be replaced with Hi-Lok® fasteners for most applications, but 
Hi-Loks® cannot be replaced with Hi-Lites®. 
 
CherryBUCK® 95 KSI One-Piece Shear Pin 

The CherryBUCK® is a bimetallic, one-piece fastener that 
combines a 95 KSI shear strength shank with a ductile, 
titanium-columbium tail. Theses fasteners are functionally 
interchangeable with comparable 6AI-4V titanium alloy 
two-piece shear fasteners, but with a number of advantages. 
Their one piece design means no foreign object damage 
(FOD), it has a 600 °F allowable temperature, and a very 
low backside profile.


4-52

Shear and tension 
pull-type pins

Shear and tension 
stump-type pins

246810

1
2

1
4

1
6

1
8

2
0

2
2

2
4

2
6

2
8

3
0

3
2

3
4

3
6

3
8

4
0

4
2

4
4

4
6

4
8

2 4 6 8
 

1
0
 

1
2
  

1
4
  

1
6
  



1
8
  



2
0
  



2
2
  



2
4
  



2
6
  



2
8
  





3
0
  





3
2
  





3
4
  





3
6
  







3
8
  







4
0
  







4
2
  







4
4
  







4
6
  









4
8
  









246810

1
2

1
4

1
6

1
8

2
0

2
2

2
4

2
6

2
8

3
0

3
2

3
4

3
6

3
8

4
0

4
2

4
4

4
6

INCH SCALEGRIP SCALE

Figure 4-105. Lockbolts. 

Figure 4-106. Lockbolt grip gauge.

Lockbolt Fastening Systems 
Also pioneered in the 1940s, the lockbolt is a two-piece 
fastener that combines the features of a high-strength bolt 
and a rivet with advantages over each. [Figure 4-105] In 
general, a lockbolt is a nonexpanding fastener that has either 
a collar swaged into annular locking grooves on the pin shank 
or a type of threaded collar to lock it in place. Available 
with either countersunk or protruding heads, lockbolts are 
permanent type fasteners assemblies and consist of a pin 
and a collar. 

A lockbolt is similar to an ordinary rivet in that the locking 
collar, or nut, is weak in tension and it is difficult to remove 
once installed. Some of the lockbolts are similar to blind 
rivets and can be completely installed from one side. Others 
are fed into the workpiece with the manufactured head on the 
far side. The installation is completed on the near side with 
a gun similar to blind rivet gun. The lockbolt is easier and 
more quickly installed than the conventional rivet or bolt and 
eliminates the use of lockwashers, cotter pins, and special 
nuts. The lockbolt is generally used in wing splice fittings, 
landing gear fittings, fuel cell fittings, longerons, beams, skin 
splice plates, and other major structural attachment.

Often called huckbolts, lockbolts are manufactured by 
companies such as Cherry® Aerospace (Cherry® Lockbolt), 
Alcoa Fastening Systems (Hucktite® Lockbolt System), 
and SPS Technologies. Used primarily for heavily stressed 
structures that require higher shear and clamp-up values than 
can be obtained with rivets, the lockbolt and Hi-lok® are often 
used for similar applications. Lockbolts are made in various 
head styles, alloys, and finishes. 

The lockbolt requires a pneumatic hammer or pull gun 
for installation. Lockbolts have their own grip gauge 
and an installation tool is required for their installation. 
[Figure 4-106] When installed, the lockbolt is rigidly and 
permanently locked in place. Three types of lockbolts are 
commonly used: pull-type, stump-type, and blind-type.

The pull-type lockbolt is mainly used in aircraft and primary 
and secondary structure. It is installed very rapidly and has 
approximately one-half the weight of equivalent AN steel 
bolts and nuts. A special pneumatic pull gun is required for 
installation of this type lockbolt, which can be performed by 
one operator since buckling is not required.

The stump-type lockbolt, although not having the extended 
stem with pull grooves, is a companion fastener to the pull-
type lockbolt. It is used primarily where clearance does not 
permit effective installation of the pull-type lockbolt. It is 
driven with a standard pneumatic riveting hammer, with 
a hammer set attached for swaging the collar into the pin 
locking grooves, and a bucking bar.

The blind-type lockbolt comes as a complete unit or 
assembly and has exceptional strength and sheet pull-together 
characteristics. Blind-type lockbolts are used where only 
one side of the work is accessible and generally where it is 
difficult to drive a conventional rivet. This type lockbolt is 
installed in a manner similar to the pull-type lockbolt.

The pins of pull- and stump-type lockbolts are made of heat-
treated alloy steel or high-strength aluminum alloy. Companion 
collars are made of aluminum alloy or mild steel. The blind-
type lockbolt consists of a heat-treated alloy steel pin, blind 
sleeve, filler sleeve, mild steel collar, and carbon steel washer.

These fasteners are used in shear and tension applications. 
The pull-type is more common and can be installed by one 
person. The stump type requires a two-person installation. 
An assembly tool is used to swage the collar onto the serrated 
grooves in the pin and break the stem flush to the top of the 
collar.

The easiest way to differentiate between tension and shear 
pins is the number of locking grooves. Tension pins normally 
have four locking grooves and shear pins have two locking 
grooves. The installation tooling preloads the pin while 
swaging the collar. The surplus end of the pin, called the 
pintail, is then fractured.

Installation Procedure

Installation of lockbolts involves proper drilling. The hole 
preparation for a lockbolt is similar to hole preparation for a 


4-53

1 2 3 4

Continued force breaks the 
pin and ejects the tail. Anvil 
returns and disengages from 
the swaged collar.

The initial pull draws the work 
up tight and pulls that portion
of the shank under the head 
into the hole.

Further pull swages the collar 
into the locking grooves to 
form a permanent lock.

Placed the pin in the hole 
from the back side of the 
work and slip the collar on. 
The hold-off head must be 
toward the gun. This allows 
the gun to preload the pin 
before swaging. Then apply 
the gun; the chuck jaws 
engage the pull grooves of 
the projecting pintail. Hold 
the gun loosely and pull the 
trigger.

5/32

3/16

1/4

5/16

3/8

Nominal
Fastener Diameter

Y Z
(Ref.)

R
Max.

T
Min.

.324/.161

.280/.208

.374/.295

.492/.404

.604/.507

.136

.164

.224

.268

.039

.253

.303

.400

.473

.576

.037

.039

.037

.110

.120

Lockbolt/Collar Acceptance Criteria

R

Z

T
Y

Figure 4-107. Lockbolt installation procedure.

Figure 4-108. Lockbolt inspection.

Hi-Lok®. An interference fit is typically used for aluminum 
and a clearance fit is used for steel, titanium, and composite 
materials. [Figure 4-107] 

Lockbolt Inspection

After installation, a lockbolt needs to be inspected to 
determine if installation is satisfactory. [Figure 4-108] 
Inspect the lockbolt as follows:

1. The head must be firmly seated.

2. The collar must be tight against the material and have 
the proper shape and size.

3. Pin protrusion must be within limits.

Lockbolt Removal

The best way to remove a lockbolt is to remove the collar and 
drive out the pin. The collar can be removed with a special 
collar cutter attached to a drill motor that mills off the collar 
without damaging the skin. If this is not possible, a collar 
splitter or small chisel can be used. Use a backup block on 
the opposite side to prevent elongation of the hole.

The Eddie-Bolt® 2 Pin Fastening System 

The Eddie-Bolt® 2 looks similar to the Hi-Lok®, but has five 
flutes, equally spaced along a portion of the pin thread area. 
A companion threaded collar deforms into the flutes at a 
predetermined torque and locks the collar in place. The collar 
can be unscrewed using special tooling. This fastening system 
can be used in either clearance or interference-fit holes.

Blind Bolts
Bolts are threaded fasteners that support loads through pre-
drilled holes. Hex, close-tolerance, and internal wrenching 
bolts are used in aircraft structural applications. Blind bolts 
have a higher strength than blind rivets and are used for 
joints that require high strength. Sometimes, these bolts can 
be direct replacements for the Hi-Lok® and lockbolt. Many 
of the new generation blind bolts are made from titanium 


4-54

During the Maxibolt® installation sequence, the Cherry® 
shift washer collapses into itself, leaving a solid washer 
that is easily retrieved.

Figure 4-109. Maxibolt® Blind Bolt System installation. 

and rated at 90 KSI shear strength, which is twice as much 
as most blind rivets.

Determining the correct length of the fastener is critical to 
correct installation. The grip length of a bolt is the distance 
from the underhead bearing surface to the first thread. The 
grip is the total thickness of material joined by the bolt. 
Ideally, the grip length should be a few thousands of an inch 
less than the actual grip to avoid bottoming the nut. Special 
grip gauges are inserted in the hole to determine the length 
of the blind bolt to be used. Every blind bolt system has its 
own grip gauge and is not interchangeable with other blind 
bolt or rivet systems. 

Blind bolts are difficult to remove due to the hardness of 
the core bolt. A special removal kit is available from the 
manufacturer for removing each type of blind bolt. These 
kits make it easier to remove the blind bolt without damaging 
the hole and parent structure. Blind bolts are available in a 
pull-type and a drive-type.

Pull-Type Blind Bolt 

Several companies manufacture the pull-type of blind bolt 
fastening systems. They may differ in some design aspects, 
but in general they have a similar function. The pull-type uses 
the drive nut concept and is composed of a nut, sleeve, and 
a draw bolt. Frequently used blind bolt systems include but 
are not limited to the Cherry Maxibolt® Blind Bolt system 
and the HuckBolt® fasteners which includes the Ti-Matic® 
Blind Bolt and the Unimatic® Advanced Bolt (UAB) blind 
bolt systems.

Cherry Maxibolt® Blind Bolt System

The Cherry Maxibolt® blind bolt, available in alloy steel 
and A-286 CRES materials, comes in four different nominal 
and oversized head styles. [Figure 4-109] One tool and 
pulling head installs all three diameters. The blind bolts 
create a larger blind side footprint and they provide excellent 
performance in thin sheet and nonmetallic applications. The 

flush breaking stem eliminates shaving while the extended 
grip range accommodates different application thicknesses. 
Cherry Maxibolts® are primarily used in structures where 
higher loads are required. The steel version is 112 KSI shear. 
The A286 version is 95 KSI shear. The Cherry® G83, G84, 
or G704 installation tools are required for installation. 

Huck Blind Bolt System

The Huck Blind Bolt is a high strength vibration-resistant 
fastener. [Figure 4-110] These bolts have been used 
successfully in many critical areas, such as engine inlets and 
leading edge applications. All fasteners are installed with a 
combination of available hand, pneumatic, pneudraulic, or 
hydraulic pull-type tools (no threads) for ease of installation. 

Huck Blind Bolts can be installed on blind side angle 
surfaces up to 5° without loss of performance. The stem is 
mechanically locked to provide vibration-resistant FOD-free 
installations. The locking collar is forced into a conical pocket 
between stem and sleeve, creating high tensile capability. The 
lock collar fills the sleeve lock pocket to prevent leakage or 
corrosion pockets (crevice corrosion). 

Flush head blind bolts are designed to install with a flush 
stem break that often requires no trimming for aerodynamic 
surfaces. The Huck Blind Bolt is available in high-strength 
A286 CRES at 95KSI shear strength in 5⁄32-inch through 3⁄8-
inch diameters in 100° flush tension and protruding head. 
Also available are shear flush heads in 3⁄16-inch diameter. 
A286 CRES Huck Blind Bolts are also available in 1⁄64-inch 
oversize diameters for repair applications.

Drive Nut-Type of Blind Bolt

Jo-bolts, Visu-lok®, Composi-Lok®, OSI Bolt®, and Radial-
Lok® fasteners use the drive nut concept and are composed 
of a nut, sleeve, and a draw bolt. [Figure 4-111] These 
types of blind bolts are used for high strength applications 
in metals and composites when there is no access to the 
blind side. Available in steel and titanium alloys, they 


4-55

1

Rivet inserted into clearance hole—tool is engaged.

2

Expander enters sleeve—upset starts to form.

3

Upset continues to form—lock starts to form.

4

Upset complete—lock completely formed.

5

Pin breaks flush, lock visible—installation complete.

Lockring (visible after installation)

ExpanderBreak neck
Gold color = Nominal diameter
Silver color = Offset diameter

Drive anvil washer

Pull grooves

Retention splines

Figure 4-110. Huck Blind Bolt system.

Figure 4-111. Drive nut blind bolt.

Figure 4-112. Drive nut blind bolt installation tool.

are installed with special tooling. Both powered and hand 
tooling is available. During installation, the nut is held 
stationary while the core bolt is rotated by the installation 
tooling. The rotation of the core bolt draws the sleeve into 

the installed position and continues to retain the sleeve for 
the life of the fastener. The bolt has left hand threads and 
driving flats on the threaded end. A break-off relief allows 
the driving portion of the bolt to break off when the sleeve is 
properly seated. These types of bolts are available in many 
different head styles, including protruding head, 100° flush 
head, 130° flush head, and hex head.

Use the grip gauge available for the type of fastener and 
select the bolt grip after careful determination of the 
material thickness. The grip of the bolt is critical for correct 
installation. [Figure 4-112]

Installation procedure: 

1. Install the fastener into the hole, and place the 
installation tooling over the screw (stem) and nut.

2. Apply torque to the screw with the installation tool 
while keeping the drive nut stationary. The screw 
continues to advance through the nut body causing 
the sleeve to be drawn up over the tapered nose of 
the nut. When the sleeve forms tightly against the 
blind side of the structure, the screw fractures in the 
break groove. The stem of Jo-bolts, Visu-lok®, and 
Composi-Lok® II fasteners does not break off flush 


4-56

5/32

#12

#2

.155–.157

.189–.193

.221–.226

No. 4

No. 6

No. 8

Rivnut® Size Drill Size Hole Tolerance

Figure 4-113. Rivet nut installation.

Figure 4-114. Recommended hole sizes for rivet nut.

with the head. A screw break-off shaver tool must be 
used if a flush installation is required. The stem of the 
newer Composi-Lok3® and OSI Bolt® break off flush.

Tapered Shank Bolt

Tapered shank bolts, such as the Taper-Lok®, are lightweight, 
high strength shear or tension bolts. This bolt has a tapered 
shank designed to provide an interference fit upon installation. 
Tapered shank bolts can be identified by a round head (rather 
than a screwdriver slot or wrench flats) and a threaded shank. 
The Taper-Lok® is comprised of a tapered, conical-shank 
fastener, installed into a precision tapered hole. The use of 
tapered shank bolts is limited to special applications such as 
high stress areas of fuel tanks. It is important that a tapered 
bolt not be substituted for any other type of fastener in repairs. 
It is equally as important not to substitute any other type of 
fastener for a tapered bolt. 

Tapered shank bolts look similar to Hi-Lok® bolts after 
installation, but the tapered shank bolts do not have the hex 
recess at the threaded end of the bolt. Tapered shank bolts 
are installed in precision-reamed holes, with a controlled 
interference fit. The interference fit compresses the material 
around the hole that results in excellent load transfer, fatigue 
resistance, and sealing. The collar used with the tapered shank 
bolts has a captive washer, and no extra washers are required. 
New tapered shank bolt installation or rework of tapered shank 
bolt holes needs to be accomplished by trained personnel. 
Properly installed, these bolts become tightly wedged and do 
not turn while torque is applied to the nut. 

Sleeve Bolts

Sleeve bolts are used for similar purposes as tapered shank 
bolts, but are easier to install. Sleeve bolts, such as the two 
piece SLEEVbolt®, consist of a tapered shank bolt in an 
expandable sleeve. The sleeve is internally tapered and 
externally straight. The sleeve bolt is installed in a standard 
tolerance straight hole. During installation, the bolt is forced 
into the sleeve. This action expands the sleeve which fills 
the hole. It is easier to drill a straight tolerance hole than it 
is to drill the tapered hole required for a tapered shank bolt.

Rivet Nut
The rivet nut is a blind installed, internally-threaded rivet 
invented in 1936 by the Goodrich Rubber Company for the 
purpose of attaching a rubber aircraft wing deicer extrusion 
to the leading edge of the wing. The original rivet nut is the 
Rivnut® currently manufactured by Bollhoff Rivnut Inc. The 
Rivnut® became widely used in the military and aerospace 
markets because of its many design and assembly advantages. 

Rivet nuts are used for the installation of fairings, trim, and 
lightly loaded fittings that must be installed after an assembly 

is completed. [Figure 4-113] Often used for parts that are 
removed frequently, the rivet nut is available in two types: 
countersunk or flat head. Installed by crimping from one side, 
the rivet nut provides a threaded hole into which machine 
screws can be installed. Where a flush fit is required, the 
countersink style can be used. Rivet nuts made of alloy steel 
are used when increased tensile and shear strength is required.
 
Hole Preparation

Flat head rivet nuts require only the proper size of hole while 
flush installation can be made into either countersunk or 
dimpled skin. Metal thinner than the rivet nut head requires 
a dimple. The rivet nut size is selected according to the 
thickness of the parent material and the size of screw to be 
used. The part number identifies the type of rivet nut and the 
maximum grip length. Recommended hole sizes are shown 
in Figure 4-114.

Correct installation requires good hole preparation, removal 
of burrs, and holding the sheets in contact while heading. 
Like any sheet metal fastener, a rivet nut should fit snugly 
into its hole. 

Blind Fasteners (Nonstructural)
Pop Rivets

Common pull-type pop rivets, produced for non-aircraft-
related applications, are not approved for use on certificated 
aircraft structures or components. However, some homebuilt 
noncertificated aircraft use pull-type rivets for their structure. 
These types of rivets are typically made of aluminum and 
can be installed with hand tools. 


4-57

Figure 4-115. Rivetless pull-through nutplate. 

Figure 4-116. Aircraft formed at a factory.

Pull-Through Nutplate Blind Rivet

Nutplate blind rivets are used where the high shear strength 
of solid rivets is not required or if there is no access to install 
a solid rivet. The 3⁄32-inch diameter blind rivet is most often 
used. The nut plate blind rivet is available with the pull-
through and self-plugging locked spindle. [Figure 4-115] 

The new Cherry® Rivetless Nut Plate, which replaces 
standard riveted nutplates, features a retainer that does 
not require flaring. This proprietary design eliminates the 
need for two additional rivet holes, as well as reaming, 
counterboring, and countersinking steps.

Forming Process
Before a part is attached to the aircraft during either 
manufacture or repair, it has to be shaped to fit into place. 
This shaping process is called forming and may be a simple 
process, such as making one or two holes for attaching; it may 
be a complex process, such as making shapes with complex 
curvatures. Forming, which tends to change the shape or 
contour of a flat sheet or extruded shape, is accomplished by 
either stretching or shrinking the material in a certain area 
to produce curves, flanges, and various irregular shapes. 
Since the operation involves altering the shape of the stock 
material, the amount of shrinking and stretching almost 
entirely depends on the type of material used. Fully annealed 
(heated and cooled) material can withstand considerably more 
stretching and shrinking and can be formed at a much smaller 
bend radius than when it is in any of the tempered conditions.

When aircraft parts are formed at the factory, they are 
made on large presses or by drop hammers equipped with 
dies of the correct shape. Factory engineers, who designate 
specifications for the materials to be used to ensure the 
finished part has the correct temper when it leaves the 
machines, plan every part. Factory draftsmen prepare a layout 
for each part. [Figure 4-116] 

Forming processes used on the flight line and those 
practiced in the maintenance or repair shop cannot duplicate 
a manufacturer’s resources, but similar techniques of 
factory metal working can be applied in the handcrafting of  
repair parts. 

Forming usually involves the use of extremely light-gauge 
alloys of a delicate nature that can be readily made useless by 
coarse and careless workmanship. A formed part may seem 
outwardly perfect, yet a wrong step in the forming procedure 
may leave the part in a strained condition. Such a defect may 
hasten fatigue or may cause sudden structural failure.

Of all the aircraft metals, pure aluminum is the most easily 
formed. In aluminum alloys, ease of forming varies with 
the temper condition. Since modern aircraft are constructed 
chiefly of aluminum and aluminum alloys, this section deals 
with the procedures for forming aluminum or aluminum alloy 
parts with a brief discussion of working with stainless steel, 
magnesium, and titanium.

Most parts can be formed without annealing the metal, 
but if extensive forming operations, such as deep draws 
(large folds) or complex curves, are planned, the metal 
should be in the dead soft or annealed condition. During 
the forming of some complex parts, operations may need 
to be stopped and the metal annealed before the process 
can be continued or completed. For example, alloy 2024 
in the “0” condition can be formed into almost any shape 
by the common forming operations, but it must be heat  
treated afterward.

Forming Operations and Terms
Forming requires either stretching or shrinking the metal, or 
sometimes doing both. Other processes used to form metal 
include bumping, crimping, and folding.


4-58

Figure 4-117. Stretch forming metal. Figure 4-118. Shrink forming metal. 

Stretching
Stretching metal is achieved by hammering or rolling metal 
under pressure. For example, hammering a flat piece of metal 
causes the material in the hammered area to become thinner in 
that area. Since the amount of metal has not been decreased, 
the metal has been stretched. The stretching process thins, 
elongates, and curves sheet metal. It is critical to ensure the 
metal is not stretched too much, making it too thin, because 
sheet metal does not rebound easily. [Figure 4-117]

Stretching one portion of a piece of metal affects the 
surrounding material, especially in the case of formed and 
extruded angles. For example, hammering the metal in the 
horizontal flange of the angle strip over a metal block causes 
its length to increase (stretched), making that section longer 
than the section near the bend. To allow for this difference in 
length, the vertical flange, which tends to keep the material 
near the bend from stretching, would be forced to curve away 
from the greater length.

Shrinking
Shrinking metal is much more difficult than stretching it. 
During the shrinking process, metal is forced or compressed 
into a smaller area. This process is used when the length of 
a piece of metal, especially on the inside of a bend, is to be 
reduced. Sheet metal can be shrunk in by hammering on a 
V-block or by crimping and then using a shrinking block. 

To curve the formed angle by the V-block method, place the 
angle on the V-block and gently hammer downward against 
the upper edge directly over the ”V.” While hammering, move 
the angle back and forth across the V-block to compress the 
material along the upper edge. Compression of the material 
along the upper edge of the vertical flange will cause the 
formed angle to take on a curved shape. The material in the 

horizontal flange will merely bend down at the center, and 
the length of that flange will remain the same. [Figure 4-118]

To make a sharp curve or a sharply bent flanged angle, 
crimping and a shrinking block can be used. In this process, 
crimps are placed in the one flange, and then by hammering 
the metal on a shrinking block, the crimps are driven, or 
shrunk, one at a time.

Cold shrinking requires the combination of a hard surface, such 
as wood or steel, and a soft mallet or hammer because a steel 
hammer over a hard surface stretches the metal, as opposed to 
shrinking it. The larger the mallet face is, the better. 

Bumping
Bumping involves shaping or forming malleable metal by 
hammering or tapping—usually with a rubber, plastic, or 
rawhide mallet. During this process, the metal is supported by 
a dolly, a sandbag, or a die. Each contains a depression into 
which hammered portions of the metal can sink. Bumping 
can be done by hand or by machine.

Crimping
Crimping is folding, pleating, or corrugating a piece of sheet 
metal in a way that shortens it or turning down a flange on 
a seam. It is often used to make one end of a piece of stove 
pipe slightly smaller so that one section may be slipped into 
another. Crimping one side of a straight piece of angle iron 
with crimping pliers causes it to curve. [Figure 4-119] 

Folding Sheet Metal
Folding sheet metal is to make a bend or crease in sheets, 
plates, or leaves. Folds are usually thought of as sharp, 
angular bends and are generally made on folding machines 
such as the box and pan brake discussed earlier in this chapter.


4-59

Radius (R)

Leg

Setback (90° bend) R + 1
Base measurement

Mold point
Bend allowance (BA)

Mold line (ML) F L A T

F
L
A
T

Thickness (T)

Bend tangent line (BL)

FLANGE

Bend tangent
line dimension

(BTLD)

MLD

BTLD

MLD

RT

SB

SBMold point

A

B
C

Figure 4-119. Crimping metal.

Figure 4-120. Bend allowance terminology.

Layout and Forming
Terminology 
The following terms are commonly used in sheet metal 
forming and flat pattern layout. Familiarity with these 
terms aids in understanding how bend calculations are used 
in a bending operation. Figure 4-120 illustrates most of  
these terms.

Base measurement—the outside dimensions of a formed part. 
Base measurement is given on the drawing or blueprint or 
may be obtained from the original part.

Leg—the longer part of a formed angle.

Flange—the shorter part of a formed angle—the opposite of 
leg. If each side of the angle is the same length, then each 
is known as a leg.

Grain of the metal—natural grain of the material is formed 
as the sheet is rolled from molten ingot. Bend lines should be 
made to lie at a 90º angle to the grain of the metal if possible.

Bend allowance (BA)—refers to the curved section of 
metal within the bend (the portion of metal that is curved in 
bending). The bend allowance may be considered as being 
the length of the curved portion of the neutral line. 

Bend radius—the arc is formed when sheet metal is bent. This 
arc is called the bend radius. The bend radius is measured 
from a radius center to the inside surface of the metal. The 
minimum bend radius depends on the temper, thickness, and 
type of material. Always use a Minimum Bend Radius Table 
to determine the minimum bend radius for the alloy that is 
going to be used. Minimum bend radius charts can be found 
in manufacturer’s maintenance manuals. 

Bend tangent line (BL)—the location at which the metal starts 
to bend and the line at which the metal stops curving. All the 
space between the band tangent lines is the bend allowance.

Neutral axis—an imaginary line that has the same length 
after bending as it had before bending. [Figure 4-121] After 
bending, the bend area is 10 to 15 percent thinner than before 
bending. This thinning of the bend area moves the neutral 
line of the metal in towards the radius center. For calculation 
purposes, it is often assumed that the neutral axis is located 
at the center of the material, although the neutral axis is not 
exactly in the center of the material. However, the amount 
of error incurred is so slight that, for most work, assuming 
it is at the center is satisfactory.

Mold line (ML)—an extension of the flat side of a part 
beyond the radius.


4-60

Neutral line

Figure 4-121. Neutral line.

Mold line dimension (MLD)—the dimension of a part made 
by the intersection of mold lines. It is the dimension the part 
would have if its corners had no radius. 

Mold point—the point of intersection of the mold lines. The 
mold point would be the outside corner of the part if there 
were no radius.

K-Factor—the percentage of the material thickness where 
there is no stretching or compressing of the material, such as 
the neutral axis. This percentage has been calculated and is 
one of 179 numbers on the K chart corresponding to one of 
the angles between 0° and 180° to which metal can be bent. 
[Figure 4-122] Whenever metal is to be bent to any angle 
other than 90° (K-factor of 90° equal to 1), the corresponding 
K-factor number is selected from the chart and is multiplied 
by the sum of the radius (R) and the thickness (T) of the metal. 
The product is the amount of setback (see next paragraph) 
for the bend. If no K chart is available, the K-factor can be 
calculated with a calculator by using the following formula: 
the K value is the tangent of one-half the bend angle.

Setback (SB)—the distance the jaws of a brake must be 
setback from the mold line to form a bend. In a 90° bend, 
SB = R + T (radius of the bend plus thickness of the metal). 
The setback dimension must be determined prior to making 
the bend because setback is used in determining the location 
of the beginning bend tangent line. When a part has more 
than one bend, setback must be subtracted for each bend. The 
majority of bends in sheet metal are 90° bends. The K-factor 
must be used for all bends that are smaller or larger than 90°.

SB = K(R+T)

Sight line—also called the bend or brake line, it is the layout 
line on the metal being formed that is set even with the nose 
of the brake and serves as a guide in bending the work.

Flat—that portion of a part that is not included in the bend. It 
is equal to the base measurement (MLD) minus the setback.

Flat = MLD – SB

Closed angle—an angle that is less than 90° when measured 
between legs, or more than 90° when the amount of bend is 
measured.

Open angle—an angle that is more than 90° when measured 
between legs, or less than 90° when the amount of bend is 
measured.

Total developed width (TDW)—the width of material 
measured around the bends from edge to edge. Finding the 
TDW is necessary to determine the size of material to be 
cut. The TDW is less than the sum of mold line dimensions 
since the metal is bent on a radius and not to a square corner 
as mold line dimensions indicate. 

Layout or Flat Pattern Development
To prevent any waste of material and to get a greater degree 
of accuracy in the finished part, it is wise to make a layout 
or flat pattern of a part before forming it. Construction of 
interchangeable structural and nonstructural parts is achieved 
by forming flat sheet stock to make channel, angle, zee, or 
hat section members. Before a sheet metal part is formed, 
make a flat pattern to show how much material is required 
in the bend areas, at what point the sheet must be inserted 
into the forming tool, or where bend lines are located. Bend 
lines must be determined to develop a flat pattern for sheet 
metal forming.

When forming straight angle bends, correct allowances 
must be made for setback and bend allowance. If shrinking 
or stretching processes are to be used, allowances must be 
made so that the part can be turned out with a minimum 
amount of forming. 

Making Straight Line Bends
When forming straight bends, the thickness of the material, 
its alloy composition, and its temper condition must be 
considered. Generally speaking, the thinner the material is, 
the more sharply it can be bent (the smaller the radius of 
bend), and the softer the material is, the sharper the bend 
is. Other factors that must be considered when making 
straight line bends are bend allowance, setback, and brake or  
sight line.

The radius of bend of a sheet of material is the radius of the 
bend as measured on the inside of the curved material. The 
minimum radius of bend of a sheet of material is the sharpest 
curve, or bend, to which the sheet can be bent without 
critically weakening the metal at the bend. If the radius of 
bend is too small, stresses and strains weaken the metal and 
may result in cracking.


4-61

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

0.0087

0.0174

0.0261

0.0349

0.0436

0.0524

0.0611

0.0699

0.0787

0.0874

0.0963

0.1051

0.1139

0.1228

0.1316

0.1405

0.1494

0.1583

0.1673

0.1763

0.1853

0.1943

0.2034

0.2125

0.2216

0.2308

0.2400

0.2493

0.2586

0.2679

0.2773

0.2867

0.2962

0.3057

0.3153

0.3249

0.3346

0.3443

0.3541

0.3639

0.3738

0.3838

0.3939

0.4040

0.4142

0.4244

0.4348

0.4452

0.4557

0.4663

0.4769

0.4877

0.4985

0.5095

0.5205

0.5317

0.5429

0.5543

0.5657

0.5773

0.5890

0.6008

0.6128

0.6248

0.6370

0.6494

0.6618

0.6745

0.6872

0.7002

0.7132

0.7265

0.7399

0.7535

0.7673

0.7812

0.7954

0.8097

0.8243

0.8391

0.8540

0.8692

0.8847

0.9004

0.9163

0.9324

0.9489

0.9656

0.9827

1.000

1.017

1.035

1.053

1.072

1.091

1.110

1.130

1.150

1.170

1.191

1.213

1.234

1.257

1.279

1.303

1.327

1.351

1.376

1.401

1.428

1.455

1.482

1.510

1.539

1.569

1.600

1.631

1.664

1.697

1.732

1.767

1.804

1.841

1.880

1.921

1.962

2.005

2.050

2.096

2.144

2.194

2.246

2.299

2.355

2.414

2.475

2.538

2.605

2.674

2.747

2.823

2.904

2.988

3.077

114.59

3.171

3.270

3.375

3.487

3.605

3.732

3.866

4.010

4.165

4.331

4.510

4.704

4.915

5.144

5.399

5.671

5.975

6.313

6.691

7.115

7.595

8.144

8.776

9.514

10.38

11.43

12.70

14.30

16.35

19.08

22.90

26.63

38.18

57.29

Inf.

Degree Degree Degree Degree DegreeK K K KK

Figure 4-122. K-factor. 

Isometric view
Scale:   3:2

.04

R=
.16

2.0

1
.0

Left view
Scale:  3:2

Figure 4-123. U-channel example.

A minimum radius of bend is specified for each type of 
aircraft sheet metal. The minimum bend radius is affected 
by the kind of material, thickness of the material, and temper 
condition of the material. Annealed sheet can be bent to a 
radius approximately equal to its thickness. Stainless steel and 
2024-T3 aluminum alloy require a fairly large bend radius. 

Bending a U-Channel
To understand the process of making a sheet metal layout, 
the steps for determining the layout of a sample U-channel 
will be discussed. [Figure 4-123] When using bend 


4-62

.012

.016

.020

.025

.032

.040

.050

.063

.071

.080

.090

.100

.125

.160

.190

.250

.312

.375

.03

.03

.03

.03

.03

.06

.06

.09

.12

.16

.19

.22

.25

.31

.38

.62

1.25

1.38

.03

.03

.12

.16

.19

.22

.25

.31

.38

.44

.50

.62

.88

1.25

1.38

2.00

2.50

2.50

.06

.09

.09

.09

.12

.16

.19

.25

.31

.38

.44

.50

.62

.75

1.00

1.25

1.50

1.88

.03

.03

.03

.03

.03

.06

.06

.06

.09

.09

.09

.12

.12

.16

.19

.31

.44

.44

.03

.03

.03

.06

.06

.09

.12

.16

.16

.19

.22

.25

.31

.44

.56

.75

1.38

1.50

.06

.09

.09

.12

.12

.16

.19

.22

.25

.31

.38

.44

.50

.75

1.00

1.25

1.50

1.88

Thickness

Aircraft
STRUCTURAL INSPECTION AND REPAIR MANUAL

CHART 204
MINIMUM BEND RADIUS FOR ALUMINUM ALLOYS

Bend radius is designated to the inside of the bend. All dimensions are in inches.

7178-0
2024-0
5052-H34
6061-T4
7075-0

7075-T6 2024-T65052-0    
6061-0    
5052-H32

6061-T6 2024-T3
2024-T4

Figure 4-124. Minimum bend radius (from the Raytheon Aircraft Structural Inspection and Repair Manual). 

allowance calculations, the following steps for finding the 
total developed length can be computed with formulas, 
charts, or computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided 
manufacturing (CAM) software packages. This channel is 
made of 0.040-inch 2024-T3 aluminum alloy.

Step 1: Determine the Correct Bend Radius

Minimum bend radius charts are found in manufacturers’ 
maintenance manuals. A radius that is too sharp cracks the 
material during the bending process. Typically, the drawing 
indicates the radius to use, but it is a good practice to double 
check. For this layout example, use the minimum radius 
chart in Figure 4-124 to choose the correct bend radius for 
the alloy, temper, and the metal thickness. For 0.040, 2024-
T3 the minimum allowable radius is 0.16-inch or 5⁄32-inch.

Step 2: Find the Setback

The setback can be calculated with a formula or can be found 
in a setback chart available in aircraft maintenance manuals 
or Source, Maintenance, and Recoverability books (SMRs). 
[Figure 4-125]

Using a Formula to Calculate the Setback

SB = setback

K = K-factor (K is 1 for 90° bends)

R = inside radius of the bend

T = material thickness

Since all of the angles in this example are 90° angles, the 
setback is calculated as follows:

 SB = K(R+T) = 0.2 inches

NOTE: K = 1 for a 90° bend. For other than a 90° bend, use 
a K-factor chart.

Using a Setback Chart to Find the Setback

The setback chart is a quick way to find the setback and is 
useful for open and closed bends, because there is no need 
to calculate or find the K-factor. Several software packages 
and online calculators are available to calculate the setback. 
These programs are often used with CAD/CAM programs. 
[Figure 4-125]


4-63

S
et

b
ac

k 
D

is
ta

n
ce

 (
S

B
)

B
en

d
 A

n
g

le
 (

B
A

)

Bend Angle (BA)

Thickness  (T)  +  Radius  (R)

Flat Pattern Setback Graph

170°        160°          150°          140° 135° 130°               120°

0.50               1.0           1.5              2.0             2.5             3.0            3.5

0.02               0.04         0.06            0.08           0.10           0.12          0.14
0.10   0.183   0.20         0.30            0.40           0.50           0.60          0.70

110°

100°

90°

80°

70°

60°

50°

45°
40°

30°

20°

10°

0
.0

2
  





0
.0

4
  





 0
.0

6
  





0.
0
8
  





  
 0

.1
0
  





0
.1

2
  





 0
.1

4
  





 0
.1

6
  
  
  
  
  
 0

.1
8

  
  
  
  
  
 2

.0

0
.5

0
  





1
.0







 1
.5







2.
0
  







 2
.5







3
.0







 3
.5







 4
.0

  
  
  
  
  
  
 4

.5
  
  
  
  
  
  
 5

.0
0
.1

0
  





0
.2

0
  





 0
.3

0
  





0.
4
0
  

0
.4

5
3
  

0
.5

0
  





0
.6

0
  





 0
.7

0
  





 0
.8

0
  
  
  
  
  
 0

.9
0

  
  
  
  
  
 1

.0

SB = DIstance from mold line to bend line
BA = Line to bend line
BA = Bend angle
   R = Bend radius
   T = Thickness

1. Enter chart at bottom on appropriate scale using sum T + R
2. Read up to bend angle
3. Determine setback from corresponding scale on left

 Example:
  T (0.063) + R (0.12) = 0.183
  BA = 135°
  Setback = 0.453

Outside
mold line

Set-
back
(SB)

Bend 
line

R

T

BA

Bend line

Figure 4-125. Setback chart. 


4-64

• Enter chart at the bottom on the appropriate scale with 
the sum of the radius and material thickness. 

• Read up to the bend angle. 

• Find the setback from corresponding scale on the left.

Example: 

• Material thickness is 0.063-inch.

• Bend angle is 135°.

• R + T = 0.183-inch. 

Find 0.183 at the bottom of the graph. It is found in the 
middle scale.

• Read up to a bend angle of 135°.

• Locate the setback at the left hand side of the graph 
in the middle scale (0.435-inch). [Figure 4-125]

Step 3: Find the Length of the Flat Line Dimension

The flat line dimension can be found using the formula: 

Flat = MLD – SB

MLD = mold line dimension

SB = setback

The flats, or flat portions of the U-channel, are equal to the 
mold line dimension minus the setback for each of the sides, 
and the mold line length minus two setbacks for the center 
flat. Two setbacks need to be subtracted from the center flat 
because this flat has a bend on either side. 

The flat dimension for the sample U-channel is calculated in 
the following manner:

Flat dimension = MLD – SB

Flat 1 = 1.00-inch – 0.2-inch = 0.8-inch

Flat 2 = 2.00-inch – (2 × 0.2-inch) = 1.6-inch

Flat 3 = 1.00-inch – 0.2-inch = 0.8-inch

Step 4: Find the Bend Allowance

When making a bend or fold in a piece of metal, the bend 
allowance or length of material required for the bend must be 
calculated. Bend allowance depends on four factors: degree 
of bend, radius of the bend, thickness of the metal, and type 
of metal used.

The radius of the bend is generally proportional to the 
thickness of the material. Furthermore, the sharper the radius 
of bend, the less the material that is needed for the bend. The 
type of material is also important. If the material is soft, it 
can be bent very sharply; but if it is hard, the radius of bend 
is greater, and the bend allowance is greater. The degree 

of bend affects the overall length of the metal, whereas the 
thickness influences the radius of bend.

Bending a piece of metal compresses the material on the 
inside of the curve and stretches the material on the outside 
of the curve. However, at some distance between these 
two extremes lies a space which is not affected by either 
force. This is known as the neutral line or neutral axis and 
occurs at a distance approximately 0.445 times the metal 
thickness (0.445 × T) from the inside of the radius of the 
bend. [Figure 4-126]

The length of this neutral axis must be determined so that 
sufficient material can be provided for the bend. This is called 
the bend allowance. This amount must be added to the overall 
length of the layout pattern to ensure adequate material for 
the bend. To save time in calculation of the bend allowance, 
formulas and charts for various angles, radii of bends, 
material thicknesses, and other factors have been developed. 

Formula 1: Bend Allowance for a 90° Bend

To the radius of bend (R) add 1⁄2 the thickness of the metal 
(1⁄2T). This gives R + 1⁄2T, or the radius of the circle of the 
neutral axis. [Figure 4-127] Compute the circumference 
of this circle by multiplying the radius of the neutral line 
(R + 1⁄2T) by 2π (NOTE: π = 3.1416): 2π (R + 1⁄2T). Since a 
90° bend is a quarter of the circle, divide the circumference 
by 4. This gives:
 

2π (R + 1⁄2T)
4

This is the bend allowance for a 90° bend. To use the formula 
for a 90° bend having a radius of 1⁄4 inch for material 0.051-
inch thick, substitute in the formula as follows.

Bend allowance = (2 × 3.1416)(0.250 + 1⁄2(0.051))
    4  

= 6.2832(0.250 + 0.0255)
4

= 6.2832(0.2755)
4

= 0.4327

The bend allowance, or the length of material required for 
the bend, is 0.4327 or 7⁄16-inch.

Formula 2: Bend Allowance for a 90° Bend

This formula uses two constant values that have evolved over 
a period of years as being the relationship of the degrees in the 
bend to the thickness of the metal when determining the bend 

 


4-65

Neutral axis

Shrinking

Stretching

0445T Distance from 
inner radius of bend

90°

R + 1/2T

Radius

T

B

C

Figure 4-126. Neutral axis and stresses resulting from bending. 

Figure 4-127. Bend allowance for a 90° bend.

allowance for a particular application. By experimentation 
with actual bends in metals, aircraft engineers have found 
that accurate bending results could be obtained by using the 
following formula for any degree of bend from 1° to 180°.

Bend allowance = (0.01743R + 0.0078T)N where:

R = the desired bend radius

T = the thickness of the metal

N = number of degrees of bend 

To use this formula for a 90° bend having a radius of .16-
inch for material 0.040-inch thick, substitute in the formula 
as follows:

Bend allowance =
(0.01743 × 0.16) + (0.0078 × 0.040) × 90 = 0.27 inches

Use of Bend Allowance Chart for a 90° Bend

In Figure 4-128, the radius of bend is shown on the top line, 
and the metal thickness is shown on the left hand column. 
The upper number in each cell is the bend allowance for a 
90° bend. The lower number in the cell is the bend allowance 
per 1° of bend. To determine the bend allowance for a 90° 
bend, simply use the top number in the chart.

Example: The material thickness of the U-channel is 0.040-
inch and the bend radius is 0.16-inch.

Reading across the top of the bend allowance chart, find 
the column for a radius of bend of .156-inch. Now, find the 
block in this column that is opposite the material thickness 
(gauge) of 0.040 in the column at the left. The upper number 
in the cell is (0.273), the correct bend allowance in inches 
for a 90° bends.

Several bend allowance calculation programs are available 
online. Just enter the material thickness, radius, and degree 
of bend and the computer program calculates the bend 
allowance.

Use of Chart for Other Than a 90° Bend

If the bend is to be other than 90°, use the lower number in 
the block (the bend allowance for 1°) and compute the bend 
allowance. 

Example:
The L-bracket shown in Figure 4-129 is made from 2024-T3 
aluminum alloy and the bend is 60° from flat. Note that the 
bend angle in the figure indicates 120°, but that is the number 
of degrees between the two flanges and not the bend angle 
from flat. To find the correct bend angle, use the following 
formula: 

Bend Angle = 180° – Angle between flanges

The actual bend is 60°. To find the correct bend radius for a 
60° bend of material 0.040-inches thick, use the following 
procedure.

1. Go to the left side of the table and find 0.040-inch.

2. Go to the right and locate the bend radius of 0.16-inch 
(0.156-inch). 

3. Note the bottom number in the block (0.003034). 

4. Multiply this number by the bend angle:
 0.003034 × 60 = 0.18204


4-66

.020

.025

.028

.032

.038

.040

.051

.064

.072

.078

.081

.091

.094

.102

.109

.125

.156

.188

.250

.062
.000693

.066
.000736

.068
.000759

.071
.000787

.075
.00837

.077
.000853

.113
.001251

.116
.001294

.119
.001318

.121
.001345

.126
.001396

.127
.001411

.134
.001413

.144
.001595

.161
.001792

.165
.001835

.167
.001859

.170
.001886

.174
.001937

.176
.001952

.183
.002034

.192
.002136

.198
.002202

.202
.002249

.204
.002272

.212
.002350

.214
.002374

.210
.002333

.214
.002376

.216
.002400

.218
.002427

.223
.002478

.224
.002493

.232
.002575

.241
.002676

.247
.002743

.251
.002790

.253
.002813

.260
.002891

.262
.002914

.268
.002977

.273
.003031

.284
.003156

.259
.002874

.263
.002917

.265
.002941

.267
.002968

.272
.003019

.273
.003034

.280
.003116

.290
.003218

.296
.003284

.300
.003331

.302
.003354

.309
.003432

.311
.003455

.317
.003518

.321
.003572

.333
.003697

.355
.003939

.309
.003433

.313
.003476

.315
.003499

.317
.003526

.322
.003577

.323
.003593

.331
.003675

.340
.003776

.436
.003842

.350
.003889

.352
.003912

.359
.003990

.361
.004014

.367
.004076

.372
.004131

.383
.004256

.405
.004497

.417
.004747

.358
.003974

.362
.004017

.364
.004040

.366
.004067

.371
.004118

.372
.004134

.379
.004215

.389
.004317

.394
.004283

.399
.004430

.401
.004453

.408
.004531

.410
.004555

.416
.004617

.420
.004672

.432
.004797

.453
.005038

.476
.005288

.406
.004515

.410
.004558

.412
.004581

.415
.004608

.419
.004659

.421
.004675

.428
.004756

.437
.004858

.443
.004924

.447
.004963

.449
.004969

.456
.005072

.459
.005096

.464
.005158

.469
.005213

.480
.005338

.502
.005579

.525
.005829

.568
.006313

.455
.005056

.459
.005098

.461
.005122

.463
.005149

.468
.005200

.469
.005215

.477
.005297

.486
.005399

.492
.005465

.496
.005512

.498
.005535

.505
.005613

.507
.005637

.513
.005699

.518
.005754

.529
.005678

.551
.006120

.573
.006370

.617
.006853

.505
.005614

.509
.005657

.511
.005680

.514
.005708

.518
.005758

.520
.005774

.527
.005855

.536
.005957

.542
.006023

.546
.006070

.548
.006094

.555
.006172

.558
.006195

.563
.006257

.568
.006312

.579
.006437

.601
.006679

.624
.006928

.667
.007412

.554
.006155

.558
.006198

.560
.006221

.562
.006249

.567
.006299

.568
.006315

.576
.006397

.585
.006498

.591
.006564

.595
.006611

.598
.006635

.604
.006713

.606
.006736

.612
.006798

.617
.006853

.628
.006978

.650
.007220

.672
.007469

.716
.007953

.603
.006695

.607
.006739

.609
.006762

.611
.006789

.616
.006840

.617
.006856

.624
.006934

.634
.007039

.639
.007105

.644
.007152

.646
.007176

.653
.007254

.655
.007277

.661
.007339

.665
.008394

.677
.007519

.698
.007761

.721
.008010

.764
.008494

.702
.007795

.705
.007838

.708
.007862

.710
.007889

.715
.007940

.716
.007955

.723
.008037

.732
.008138

.738
.008205

.745
.008252

.745
.008275

.752
.008353

.754
.008376

.760
.008439

.764
.008493

.776
.008618

.797
.008860

.820
.009109

.863
.009593

.799
.008877

.803
.008920

.805
.007862

.807
.008971

.812
.009021

.813
.009037

.821
.009119

.830
.009220

836
.009287

.840
.009333

.842
.009357

.849
.009435

.851
.009458

.857
.009521

.862
.009575

.873
.009700

.895
.009942

.917
.010191

.961
.010675

RADIUS OF BEND, IN INCHESMetal Thickness

1/16 .063 1/8 .125 3/16 .188 1/4 .2501/32 .031 3/32 .094 7/32 .219 9/32 .281 5/16 .313 11/32 .344 3/8 .375 7/16 .438 1/2 .5005/32 .156

1.98

1.13

0.04

R 
= 

0.1
6"

120°

Figure 4-128. Bend allowance.

Figure 4-129. Bend allowance for bends less than 90°.


4-67

0.80 0.801.60

0.27 0.27

B
e
n
d
 a

llo
w

a
n
ce

F
la

t 
1

Flat 2

F
la

t 
3

B
e
n
d
 a

llo
w

a
n
ce

Figure 4-130. Flat pattern layout. 

Be
nd

 ta
ng

en
t li

ne
s

Brake

Sight line
The sight line is located one 
radius inside the bend tangent 
line that is placed in the brake. Bend tangent lines

Sight line looking straight
down the nose radius bar

Brake
nose

Figure 4-131. Sight line.

Step 5: Find the Total Developed Width of the Material

The total developed width (TDW) can be calculated when 
the dimensions of the flats and the bend allowance are found. 
The following formula is used to calculate TDW:

TDW = Flats + (bend allowance × number of bends)

For the U-channel example, this gives:

TDW = Flat 1 + Flat 2 + Flat 3 + (2 × BA)

TDW = 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.8 + (2 × 0.27)

TDW = 3.74-inches

Note that the amount of metal needed to make the channel 
is less than the dimensions of the outside of the channel 
(total of mold line dimensions is 4 inches). This is because 
the metal follows the radius of the bend rather than going 
from mold line to mold line. It is good practice to check 
that the calculated TDW is smaller than the total mold line 
dimensions. If the calculated TDW is larger than the mold 
line dimensions, the math was incorrect. 

Step 6: Flat Pattern Lay Out

After a flat pattern layout of all relevant information is made, 
the material can be cut to the correct size, and the bend tangent 
lines can be drawn on the material. [Figure 4-130]

Step 7: Draw the Sight Lines on the Flat Pattern

The pattern laid out in Figure 4-130 is complete, except 
for a sight line that needs to be drawn to help position 
the bend tangent line directly at the point where the bend 
should start. Draw a line inside the bend allowance area that 
is one bend radius away from the bend tangent line that is 
placed under the brake nose bar. Put the metal in the brake 
under the clamp and adjust the position of the metal until 
the sight line is directly below the edge of the radius bar. 
[Figure 4-131] Now, clamp the brake on the metal and raise 

the leaf to make the bend. The bend begins exactly on the 
bend tangent line. 

NOTE: A common mistake is to draw the sight line in the 
middle of the bend allowance area, instead of one radius 
away from the bend tangent line that is placed under the 
brake nose bar.

Using a J-Chart To Calculate Total Developed Width
The J-chart, often found in the SRM, can be used to determine 
bend deduction or setback and the TDW of a flat pattern 
layout when the inside bend radius, bend angle, and material 
thickness are known. [Figure 4-132] While not as accurate as 
the traditional layout method, the J-chart provides sufficient 
information for most applications. The J-chart does not 
require difficult calculations or memorized formulas because 
the required information can be found in the repair drawing 
or can be measured with simple measuring tools. 


4-68

Instruction
Place a straightedge across the chart connecting the radius on the upper scale and
thickness on lower scale. Then, locate the angle on the right hand scale and follow
this line horizontally until it meets the straight edge. The factor X is then read on the
diagonally curving line. Interpolate when the factor X falls between lines.

Bend Radius

Thickness

A
n
g
le

F
a
ct

o
r 

X

X = Amount to be reduced from sum of flange dimension
A + B − X = Developed length

Example

 0.063 Material
 0.12 Bend raduis
 45° Angle
 X = 0.035

0.50 0.47 0.44 0.40 0.38 0.34 0.31 0.28 0.25 0.22 0.19 0.16 0.12 0.09 0.06 0.03 0.00

0.130 0.120 0.110 0.100 0.090 0.080 0.070 0.060 0.050 0.040 0.030 0.020 0.010 0.000

150°

140°

130°
120°
115°
110°
105°
100°
95°

90°

85°

80°

75°

70°

65°

60°

55°

50°

45°

40°

35°

30°

A

BR

  Bend angle

1.00
1.20
1.40

1.60

0.90

0.80

0.70

0.05

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.40
0.50
0.60

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.10

1.70

0.04

0.03
0.02 0.01

Figure 4-132. J chart. 

When using the J-chart, it is helpful to know whether the 
angle is open (greater than 90°) or closed (less than 90°) 
because the lower half of the J-chart is for open angles and 
the upper half is for closed angles.

How To Find the Total Developed Width Using a 
J-Chart

• Place a straightedge across the chart and connect the 
bend radius on the top scale with the material thickness 
on the bottom scale. [Figure 4-132]

• Locate the angle on the right hand scale and follow 
this line horizontally until it meets the straight edge.

• The factor X (bend deduction) is then read on the 
diagonally curving line.

• Interpolate when the X factor falls between lines.

• Add up the mold line dimensions and subtract the X 
factor to find the TDW.


4-69

2.00"

0.063"

R =
 0.

22
"

2.00"

2.0"

0.5"

R 
= 

0.
25

"

135°

2.0"

Figure 4-133. Example 1 of J chart. 

Figure 4-134. Example 2 of J chart.

Figure 4-135. Brake radius nosepiece adjustment. 

Example 1

Bend radius = 0.22-inch

Material thickness = 0.063-inch

Bend angle = 90º

ML 1 = 2.00/ML 2 = 2.00

Use a straightedge to connect the bend radius (0.22-inch) at 
the top of the graph with the material thickness at the bottom 
(0.063-inch). Locate the 90° angle on the right hand scale and 
follow this line horizontally until it meets the straightedge. 
Follow the curved line to the left and find 0.17 at the left side. 
The X factor in the drawing is 0.17-inch. [Figure 4-133]

Total developed width =
(Mold line 1 + Mold line 2) – X factor

Total developed width = (2 + 2) – .17 = 3.83-inches

Example 2

Bend radius = 0.25-inch

Material thickness = 0.050-inch

Bend angle = 45º

ML 1 = 2.00/ML 2 = 2.00

Figure 4-134 illustrates a 135° angle, but this is the angle 
between the two legs. The actual bend from flat position is 
45° (180 – 135 = 45). Use a straightedge to connect the bend 
radius (0.25-inch) at the top of the graph with the material 
thickness at the bottom (.050-inch). Locate the 45° angle on 
the right hand scale and follow this line horizontally until 
it meets the straight edge. Follow the curved line to the left 
and find 0.035 at the left side. The X factor in the drawing 
is 0.035 inch. 

Total developed width =
(Mold line 1 + Mold line 2) – X factor

Total developed width = (2 + 2) – .035 = 3.965-inch

Using a Sheet Metal Brake to Fold Metal
The brake set up for box and pan brakes and cornice brakes 
is identical. [Figure 4-135] A proper set up of the sheet 
metal brake is necessary because accurate bending of sheet 
metal depends on the thickness and temper of the material 
to be formed and the required radius of the part. Any time a 
different thickness of sheet metal needs to be formed or when 
a different radius is required to form the part, the operator 
needs to adjust the sheet metal brake before the brake is 
used to form the part. For this example, an L-channel made 
from 2024 –T3 aluminum alloy that is 0.032-inch thick will 
be bent.

Step 1: Adjustment of Bend Radius
The bend radius necessary to bend a part can be found in 
the part drawings, but if it is not mentioned in the drawing, 
consult the SRM for a minimum bend radius chart. This 
chart lists the smallest radius allowable for each thickness 
and temper of metal that is normally used. To bend tighter 
than this radius would jeopardize the integrity of the part. 
Stresses left in the area of the bend may cause it to fail while 
in service, even if it does not crack while bending it. 


4-70

UPPER JAW

BED

LOWER JAW

B
E

N
D

IN
G

 L
E

A
F

NOSE RADIUS
BAR

Each of these nose radius shims 
is 0.063 inch thick, which gives 
radius choices of 1/8", 3/16", and 1/4"

This radius shim builds radius 
to precisely 1/16"R

Figure 4-136. Interchangeable brake radius bars.

Figure 4-137. Nose radius shims may be used when the brake radius bar is smaller than required.

The brake radius bars of a sheet metal brake can be replaced 
with another brake radius bar with a different diameter. 
[Figure 4-136] For example, a 0.032-inch 2024-T3 L channel 
needs to be bent with a radius of 1⁄8-inch and a radius bar with 
a 1⁄8-inch radius must be installed. If different brake radius 
bars are not available, and the installed brake radius bar is 
smaller than required for the part, it is necessary to bend 
some nose radius shims. [Figure 4-137]

If the radius is so small that it tends to crack annealed 
aluminum, mild steel is a good choice of material. 
Experimentation with a small piece of scrap material is 
necessary to manufacture a thickness that increases the radius 
to precisely 1⁄16-inch or 1⁄8-inch. Use radius and fillet gauges 

to check this dimension. From this point on, each additional 
shim is added to the radius before it. [Figure 4-138]

Example: If the original nose was 1⁄16-inch and a piece of .063-
inch material (1⁄16-inch) was bent around it, the new outside 
radius is 1⁄8-inch. If another .063-inch layer (1⁄16-inch) is added, 
it is now a 3⁄16-inch radius. If a piece of .032-inch (1⁄32-inch) 
instead of .063-inch material (1⁄16-inch) is bent around the 
1⁄8-inch radius, a 5⁄32-inch radius results. 

Step 2: Adjusting Clamping Pressure
The next step is setting clamping pressure. Slide a piece of 
the material with the same thickness as the part to be bent 
under the brake radius piece. Pull the clamping lever toward 
the operator to test the pressure. This is an over center type 
clamp and, when properly set, will not feel springy or spongy 
when pulled to its fully clamped position. The operator must 
be able to pull this lever over center with a firm pull and have 
it bump its limiting stops. On some brakes, this adjustment 
has to be made on both sides of the brake. 

Place test strips on the table 3 inches from each end and one 
in the center between the bed and the clamp, adjust clamp 
pressure until it is tight enough to prevent the work pieces 
from slipping while bending. The clamping pressure can 
be adjusted with the clamping pressure nut. [Figure 4-139]


4-71

Pull forward to clamp (no sponginess
felt when evenly set on BOTH sides)

Note: Bending leaf counterbalance omitted for clarity

Limiting stop

Nut to adjust clamping pressure

Lifting nut

Radius shims

Material to be bent

Clamping pressure
adjustment nut

Brake nose gap
adjustment knob

Figure 4-138. General brake overview including radius shims. 

Figure 4-139. Adjust clamping pressure with the clamping pressure 
nut.

Figure 4-140. Brake nose gap adjustment with piece of material 
same thickness as part to be formed. 

Step 3: Adjusting the Nose Gap
Adjust the nose gap by turning the large brake nose gap 
adjustment knobs at the rear of the upper jaw to achieve 
its proper alignment. [Figure 4-140] The perfect setting 
is obtained when the bending leaf is held up to the angle 
of the finished bend and there is one material thickness 
between the bending leaf and the nose radius piece. Using 

a piece of material the thickness of the part to be bent as a 
feeler gauge can help achieve a high degree of accuracy. 
[Figures 4-140 and 4-141] It is essential this nose gap be 
perfect, even across the length of the part to be bent. Check 
by clamping two test strips between the bed and the clamp 3 
inches from each end of the brake. [Figure 4-142] Bend 90° 
[Figure 4-143], remove test strips, and place one on top of 


4-72

Should slip snugly 
in and out

BENDING LEAF NOSEGAP

Hold bending leaf at the finished 
angle of bend 90°(in this case)  

Scrap of material to be bent

Figure 4-141. Profile illustration of brake nose gap adjustment.

Figure 4-142. Brake alignment with two test strips 3-inches from 
each end.

Figure 4-143. Brake alignment with two test strips bent at 90°. 

Figure 4-144. Brake alignment by comparing test strips. 

the other; they should match. [Figure 4-144] If they do not 
match, adjust the end with the sharper bend back slightly. 

Folding a Box
A box can be formed the same way as the U-channel described 
on in the previous paragraphs, but when a sheet metal part 
has intersecting bend radii, it is necessary to remove material 
to make room for the material contained in the flanges. This 
is done by drilling or punching holes at the intersection of 
the inside bend tangent lines. These holes, called relief holes 
and whose diameter is approximately twice the bend radius, 
relieve stresses in the metal as it is bent and prevent the metal 
from tearing. Relief holes also provide a neatly trimmed corner 
from which excess material may be trimmed. 


4-73

2"

Flat

Flat Flat

Area of bend (BA)

A
re

a 
o

f 
b

en
d

 (
B

A
)

1"
2"

Bend relief radius

Intersection of
inside bend 
tangent lines

11∕16

1 11∕16

1
1
∕16

7∕16

7
∕16

2 13∕16

2
1

2
 1

3
∕16

Notice overlapping mold lines (by 1 MG)

R = 0.250 (1∕4)
T = 0.063 (1∕16)
SB = 0.313 (5∕16)
BA = 0.437 (7∕16)
MG = 0.191 (3∕16)

Normal trim 
tangent to radius

If necessary for
flanges to touch

If 5∕16 R is required,
punch 5∕8 hole

Figure 4-145. Relief hole location. Figure 4-146. Relief hole layout. 

The larger and smoother the relief hole is, the less likely it 
will be that a crack will form in the corner. Generally, the 
radius of the relief hole is specified on the drawing. A box 
and pan brake, also called a finger brake, is used to bend the 
box. Two opposite sides of the box are bent first. Then, the 
fingers of the brake are adjusted so the folded-up sides ride 
up in the cracks between the fingers when the leaf is raised 
to bend the other two sides. 

The size of relief holes varies with thickness of the material. 
They should be no less than 1⁄8-inch in diameter for aluminum 
alloy sheet stock up to and including 0.064-inch thick, or 
3⁄160-inch in diameter for stock ranging from 0.072-inch 
to 0.128-inch thickness. The most common method of 
determining the diameter of a relief hole is to use the radius 
of bend for this dimension, provided it is not less than the 
minimum allowance (1⁄8-inch).

Relief Hole Location
Relief holes must touch the intersection of the inside bend 
tangent lines. To allow for possible error in bending, make 
the relief holes extend 1⁄32-inch to 1⁄16-inch behind the inside 
bend tangent lines. It is good practice to use the intersection 
of these lines as the center for the holes. The line on the inside 
of the curve is cut at an angle toward the relief holes to allow 
for the stretching of the inside flange.

The positioning of the relief hole is important. [Figure 4-145] 
It should be located so its outer perimeter touches the 

intersection of the inside bend tangent lines. This keeps any 
material from interfering with the bend allowance area of the 
other bend. If these bend allowance areas intersected with 
each other, there would be substantial compressive stresses 
that would accumulate in that corner while bending. This 
could cause the part to crack while bending.

Layout Method
Lay out the basic part using traditional layout procedures. 
This determines the width of the flats and the bend allowance. 
It is the intersection of the inside bend tangent lines that index 
the bend relief hole position. Bisect these intersected lines 
and move outward the distance of the radius of the hole on 
this line. This is the center of the hole. Drill at this point and 
finish by trimming off the remainder of the corner material. 
The trim out is often tangent to the radius and perpendicular 
to the edge. [Figure 4-146] This leaves an open corner. If the  
corner must be closed, or a slightly longer flange is necessary, 
then trim out accordingly. If the corner is to be welded, it 
is necessary to have touching flanges at the corners. The 
length of the flange should be one material thickness shorter 
than the finished length of the part so only the insides of the 
flanges touch. 

Open and Closed Bends
Open and closed bends present unique problems that require 
more calculations than 90° bends. In the following 45° and 
a 135° bend examples, the material is 0.050-inch thick and 
the bend radius is 3⁄16-inch.


4-74

135°

1.52

R 
.19

0.77

1.52

R .1
9

45°

135° 0
.7

7

0.05

Figure 4-147. Open bend. 

Figure 4-148. Closed bend.

Open End Bend (Less Than 90°)
Figure 4-147 shows an example for a 45° bend.

1. Look up K-factor in K chart. K-factor for 45° is 
0.41421-inch.

2. Calculate setback.

 SB = K(R + T)

 SB = 0.41421-inch(0.1875-inch + 0.050-inch) = 
0.098-inch

3. Calculate bend allowance for 45°. Look up bend 
allowance for 1° of bend in the bend allowance chart 
and multiply this by 45.   

 0.003675-inch × 45 = 0.165-inch

4. Calculate flats. 

 Flat = Mold line dimension – SB

 Flat 1 = .77-inch – 0.098-inch = 0.672-inch

 Flat 2 = 1.52-inch – 0.098-inch = 1.422-inch

5. Calculate TDW

 TDW = Flats + Bend allowance

 TDW = 0.672-inch + 1.422-inch + 0.165-inch = 2.259-inch.

Observe that the brake reference line is still located one radius 
from the bend tangent line. 

Closed End Bend (More Than 90°)
Figure 4-148 shows an example of a 135° bend.

1. Look up K-factor in K chart. K-factor for 135° is 
2.4142-inch.

2. Calculate SB.

 SB = K(R + T)

 SB = 2.4142-inch(0.1875-inch + 0.050-inch) = 0.57-
inch

3. Calculate bend allowance for 135°. Look up bend 
allowance for 1° of bend in the bend allowance chart 
and multiply this by 135. 

 0.003675-inch × 135 = 0.496-inch

4. Calculate flats. 

 Flat = Mold line dimension – SB

 Flat 1 = 0.77-inch – 0.57-inch = 0.20-inch 

 Flat 2 = 1.52-inch – 0.57-inch = 0.95-inch

5. Calculate TDW.

 TDW = Flats + Bend allowance

 TDW = 0.20-inch + 0.95-inch + 0.496-inch = 1.65-
inch

It is obvious from both examples that a closed bend has a 
smaller TDW than an open-end bend and the material length 
needs to be adjusted accordingly.

Hand Forming
All hand forming revolves around the processes of stretching 
and shrinking metal. As discussed earlier, stretching means to 
lengthen or increase a particular area of metal while shrinking 
means to reduce an area. Several methods of stretching and 
shrinking may be used, depending on the size, shape, and 
contour of the part being formed.

For example, if a formed or extruded angle is to be curved, 
either stretch one leg or shrink the other, whichever makes 
the part fit. In bumping, the material is stretched in the bulge 
to make it balloon, and in joggling, the material is stretched 
between the joggles. Material in the edge of lightning holes 
is often stretched to form a beveled reinforcing ridge around 
them. The following paragraphs discuss some of these 
techniques.

Straight Line Bends
The cornice brake and bar folder are ordinarily used to make 
straight bends. Whenever such machines are not available, 
comparatively short sections can be bent by hand with the 
aid of wooden or metal bending blocks.

After a blank has been laid out and cut to size, clamp it along 
the bend line between two wooden forming blocks held in 


4-75

Figure 4-149. V-block forming. 

a vise. The wooden forming blocks should have one edge 
rounded as needed for the desired radius of bend. It should 
also be curved slightly beyond 90° to allow for spring-back. 

Bend the metal that protrudes beyond the bending block to 
the desired angle by tapping lightly with a rubber, plastic, 
or rawhide mallet. Start tapping at one end and work back 
and forth along the edge to make a gradual and even bend. 
Continue this process until the protruding metal is bent to the 
desired angle against the forming block. Allow for spring-
back by driving the material slightly farther than the actual 
bend. If a large amount of metal extends beyond the forming 
blocks, maintain hand pressure against the protruding sheet 
to prevent it from bouncing. Remove any irregularities by 
holding a straight block of hardwood edgewise against the 
bend and striking it with heavy blows of a mallet or hammer. 
If the amount of metal protruding beyond the bending blocks 
is small, make the entire bend by using the hardwood block 
and hammer.

Formed or Extruded Angles
Both formed and extruded types of angles can be curved (not 
bent sharply) by stretching or shrinking either of the flanges. 
Curving by stretching one flange is usually preferred since 
the process requires only a V-block and a mallet and is easily 
accomplished.

Stretching with V-Block Method

In the stretching method, place the flange to be stretched in 
the groove of the V-block. [Figure 4-149] (If the flange is 
to be shrunk, place the flange across the V-block.) Using a 

round, soft-faced mallet, strike the flange directly over the 
V portion with light, even blows while gradually forcing it 
downward into the V. 

Begin at one end of the flange and form the curve gradually 
and evenly by moving the strip slowly back and forth, 
distributing the hammer blows at equal spaces on the 
flange. Hold the strip firmly to keep it from bouncing when 
hammered. An overly heavy blow buckles the metal, so keep 
moving the flange across the V-block, but always lightly strike 
the spot directly above the V. 

Lay out a full-sized, accurate pattern on a sheet of paper or 
plywood and periodically check the accuracy of the curve. 
Comparing the angle with the pattern determines exactly 
how the curve is progressing and just where it needs to be 
increased or decreased. It is better to get the curve to conform 
roughly to the desired shape before attempting to finish any 
one portion, because the finishing or smoothing of the angle 
may cause some other portion of the angle to change shape. 
If any part of the angle strip is curved too much, reduce the 
curve by reversing the angle strip on the V-block, placing the 
bottom flange up, and striking it with light blows of the mallet.

Try to form the curve with a minimum amount of hammering, 
for excessive hammering work hardens the metal. Work-
hardening can be recognized by a lack of bending response or 
by springiness in the metal. It can be recognized very readily 
by an experienced worker. In some cases, the part may have 
to be annealed during the curving operation. If so, be sure 
to heat treat the part again before installing it on the aircraft.

Shrinking With V-Block and Shrinking Block Methods

Curving an extruded or formed angle strip by shrinking may 
be accomplished by either the previously discussed V-block 
method or the shrinking block method. While the V-block 
is more satisfactory because it is faster, easier, and affects 
the metal less, good results can be obtained by the shrinking 
block method.

In the V-block method, place one flange of the angle strip 
flat on the V-block with the other flange extending upward. 
Using the process outlined in the stretching paragraphs, begin 
at one end of the angle strip and work back and forth making 
light blows. Strike the edge of the flange at a slight angle to 
keep the vertical flange from bending outward. 

Occasionally, check the curve for accuracy with the pattern. 
If a sharp curve is made, the angle (cross-section of the 
formed angle) closes slightly. To avoid such closing of the 
angle, clamp the angle strip to a hardwood board with the 
hammered flange facing upward using small C-clamps. The 


4-76

Form blocks

Hardwood wedge block

Figure 4-150. Crimping a metal flange in order to form a curve. Figure 4-151. Forming a flanged angle using forming blocks.

jaws of the C-clamps should be covered with masking tape. 
If the angle has already closed, bring the flange back to the 
correct angle with a few blows of a mallet or with the aid 
of a small hardwood block. If any portion of the angle strip 
is curved too much, reduce it by reversing the angle on the 
V-block and hammering with a suitable mallet, as explained 
in the previous paragraph on stretching. After obtaining the 
proper curve, smooth the entire angle by planishing with a 
soft-faced mallet.

If the curve in a formed angle is to be quite sharp or if the 
flanges of the angle are rather broad, the shrinking block 
method is generally used. In this process, crimp the flange 
that is to form the inside of the curve.

When making a crimp, hold the crimping pliers so that the 
jaws are about 1⁄8-inch apart. By rotating the wrist back and 
forth, bring the upper jaw of the pliers into contact with the 
flange, first on one side and then on the other side of the 
lower jaw. Complete the crimp by working a raised portion 
into the flange, gradually increasing the twisting motion of 
the pliers. Do not make the crimp too large because it will 
be difficult to work out. The size of the crimp depends upon 
the thickness and softness of the material, but usually about 
1⁄4-inch is sufficient. Place several crimps spaced evenly along 
the desired curve with enough space left between each crimp 
so that jaws of the shrinking block can easily be attached.

After completing the crimping, place the crimped flange in 
the shrinking block so that one crimp at a time is located 
between the jaws. [Figure 4-150] Flatten each crimp with 
light blows of a soft-faced mallet, starting at the apex (the 
closed end) of the crimp and gradually working toward the 
edge of the flange. Check the curve of the angle with the 
pattern periodically during the forming process and again 

after all the crimps have been worked out. If it is necessary to 
increase the curve, add more crimps and repeat the process. 
Space the additional crimps between the original ones so that 
the metal does not become unduly work hardened at any one 
point. If the curve needs to be increased or decreased slightly 
at any point, use the V-block.

After obtaining the desired curve, planish the angle strip over 
a stake or a wooden form.

Flanged Angles
The forming process for the following two flanged angles 
is slightly more complicated than the previously discussed 
angles because the bend is shorter (not gradually curved) and 
necessitates shrinking or stretching in a small or concentrated 
area. If the flange is to point toward the inside of the bend, the 
material must be shrunk. If it is to point toward the outside, 
it must be stretched. 

Shrinking
In forming a flanged angle by shrinking, use wooden forming 
blocks similar to those shown in Figure 4-151 and proceed 
as follows:

1. Cut the metal to size, allowing for trimming after 
forming. Determine the bend allowance for a 90° bend 
and round the edge of the forming block accordingly.

2. Clamp the material in the form blocks as shown in 
Figure 4-151, and bend the exposed flange against 
the block. After bending, tap the blocks slightly. This 
induces a setting process in the bend.  


4-77

Figure 4-152. Shrinking.

Figure 4-153. Stretching a flanged angle. 

Figure 4-154. Forming blocks. 

3. Using a soft-faced shrinking mallet, start hammering 
near the center and work the flange down gradually 
toward both ends. The flange tends to buckle at the 
bend because the material is made to occupy less 
space. Work the material into several small buckles 
instead of one large one and work each buckle 
out gradually by hammering lightly and gradually 
compressing the material in each buckle. The use of 
a small hardwood wedge block aids in working out 
the buckles. [Figure 4-152]

4. Planish the flange after it is flattened against the form 
block and remove small irregularities. If the form blocks 
are made of hardwood, use a metal planishing hammer. 
If the forms are made of metal, use a soft-faced mallet. 
Trim the excess material away and file and polish.

Stretching
To form a flanged angle by stretching, use the same forming 
blocks, wooden wedge block, and mallet as used in the 
shrinking process and proceed as follows:

1. Cut the material to size (allowing for trim), determine 
bend allowance for a 90° bend, and round off the edge 
of the block to conform to the desired radius of bend.

2. Clamp the material in the form blocks. [Figure 4-153]

3. Using a soft-faced stretching mallet, start hammering 
near the ends and work the flange down smoothly and 
gradually to prevent cracking and splitting. Planish 
the flange and angle as described in the previous 
procedure, and trim and smooth the edges, if necessary.

 
Curved Flanged Parts
Curved flanged parts are usually hand formed with a concave 
flange, the inside edge, and a convex flange, the outside edge. 

The concave flange is formed by stretching, while the 
convex flange is formed by shrinking. Such parts are 
shaped with the aid of hardwood or metal forming blocks. 
[Figure 4-154] These blocks are made in pairs and are 


4-78

Flange

Holes

Crimps

Figure 4-155. Plain nose rib.

Figure 4-156. Nose rib with relief holes. 

Figure 4-157. Nose rib with crimps.

Figure 4-158. Nose rib using a combination of forms.

designed specifically for the shape of the area being 
formed. These blocks are made in pairs similar to those 
used for straight angle bends and are identified in the same 
manner. They differ in that they are made specifically for 
the particular part to be formed, they fit each other exactly, 
and they conform to the actual dimensions and contour of 
the finished article.

The forming blocks may be equipped with small aligning 
pins to help line up the blocks and to hold the metal in place 
or they may be held together by C-clamps or a vise. They 
also may be held together with bolts by drilling through form 
blocks and the metal, provided the holes do not affect the 
strength of the finished part. The edges of the forming block 
are rounded to give the correct radius of bend to the part, and 
are undercut approximately 5° to allow for spring-back of the 
metal. This undercut is especially important if the material 
is hard or if the bend must be accurate.

The nose rib offers a good example of forming a curved 
flange because it incorporates both stretching and shrinking 
(by crimping). They usually have a concave flange, the 
inside edge, and a convex flange, the outside edge. Note 
the various types of forming represented in the following 
figures. In the plain nose rib, only one large convex flange 
is used. [Figure 4-155] Because of the great distance around 
the part and the likelihood of buckles in forming, it is rather 
difficult to form. The flange and the beaded (raised ridge 
on sheet metal used to stiffen the piece) portion of this rib 
provide sufficient strength to make this a good type to use. 
In Figure 4-156, the concave flange is difficult to form, but 
the outside flange is broken up into smaller sections by relief 
holes. In Figure 4-157, note that crimps are placed at equally 
spaced intervals to absorb material and cause curving, while 
also giving strength to the part.

In Figure 4-158, the nose rib is formed by crimping, beading, 
putting in relief holes, and using a formed angle riveted on 

each end. The beads and the formed angles supply strength to 
the part. The basic steps in forming a curved flange follow: 
[Figures 4-159 and 160]


4-79

45°

Figure 4-159. Forming a concave flange.

Figure 4-160. Forming a convex flange. 

1. Cut the material to size, allowing about 1⁄4-inch excess 
material for trim and drill holes for alignment pins.

2. Remove all burrs (jagged edges). This reduces the 
possibility of the material cracking at the edges during 
the forming process.

3. Locate and drill holes for alignment pins.

4. Place the material between the form blocks and 
clamp blocks tightly in a vise to prevent the material 
from moving or shifting. Clamp the work as closely 
as possible to the particular area being hammered to 
prevent strain on the form blocks and to keep the metal 
from slipping.

Concave Surfaces

Bend the flange on the concave curve first. This practice 
may keep the flange from splitting open or cracking when 
the metal is stretched. Should this occur, a new piece must 
be made. Using a plastic or rawhide mallet with a smooth, 
slightly rounded face, start hammering at the extreme ends 
of the part and continue toward the center of the bend. This 
procedure permits some of the metal at the ends of the part 
to be worked into the center of the curve where it is needed. 
Continue hammering until the metal is gradually worked 
down over the entire flange, flush with the form block. After 
the flange is formed, trim off the excess material and check 
the part for accuracy. [Figure 4-159]

Convex Surfaces

Convex surfaces are formed by shrinking the material over 
a form block. [Figure 4-160] Using a wooden or plastic 
shrinking mallet and a backup or wedge block, start at the 
center of the curve and work toward both ends. Hammer the 

flange down over the form, striking the metal with glancing 
blows at an angle of approximately 45° and with a motion 
that tends to pull the part away from the radius of the form 
block. Stretch the metal around the radius bend and remove 
the buckles gradually by hammering on a wedge block. Use 
the backup block to keep the edge of the flange as nearly 
perpendicular to the form block as possible. The backup block 
also lessens the possibility of buckles, splits, or cracks. Finally, 
trim the flanges of excess metal, planish, remove burrs, round 
the corners (if any), and check the part for accuracy.

Forming by Bumping
As discussed earlier, bumping involves stretching the sheet 
metal by bumping it into a form and making it balloon. 
[Figure 4-161] Bumping can be done on a form block or 
female die, or on a sandbag.


4-80

1
2

2

3

3

4

4

1

Templates for working the form block

Form block

Holddown plate

Finished part

Figure 4-161. Form block bumping.

Either method requires only one form: a wooden block, a lead 
die, or a sandbag. The blister, or streamlined cover plate, is 
an example of a part made by the form block or die method 
of bumping. Wing fillets are an example of parts that are 
usually formed by bumping on a sandbag. 

Form Block or Die

The wooden block or lead die designed for form block 
bumping must have the same dimensions and contour as the 
outside of the blister. To provide enough bucking weight 
and bearing surface for fastening the metal, the block or die 
should be at least one inch larger in all dimensions than the 
form requires.

Follow these procedures to create a form block: 

1. Hollow the block out with tools, such as saws, chisels, 
gouges, files, and rasps.

2. Smooth and finish the block with sandpaper. The inside 
of the form must be as smooth as possible, because the 
slightest irregularity shows up on the finished part.

3. Prepare several templates (patterns of the cross-
section), as shown in Figure 4-161 so that the form 
can be checked for accuracy.

4. Shape the contour of the form at points 1, 2, and 3.

5. Shape the areas between the template checkpoints to 
conform the remaining contour to template 4. Shaping 
of the form block requires particular care because 
the more nearly accurate it is, the less time it takes to 
produce a smooth, finished part.

 
After the form is prepared and checked, perform the bumping 
as follows:

1. Cut a metal blank to size allowing an extra 1⁄2 to 1-inch 
to permit drawing.

2. Apply a thin coat of light oil to the block and the 
aluminum to prevent galling (scraping on rough spots).

3. Clamp the material between the block and steel plate. 
Ensure it is firmly supported yet it can slip a little 
toward the inside of the form.

4. Clamp the bumping block in a bench vise. Use a soft-
faced rubber mallet, or a hardwood drive block with 
a suitable mallet, to start the bumping near the edges 
of the form.

5. Work the material down gradually from the edges 
with light blows of the mallet. Remember, the purpose 
of bumping is to work the material into shape by 
stretching rather than forcing it into the form with 
heavy blows. Always start bumping near the edge of 
the form. Never start near the center of the blister.

6. Before removing the work from the form, smooth it 
as much as possible by rubbing it with the rounded 
end of either a maple block or a stretching mallet.

7. Remove the blister from the bumping block and trim 
to size.


4-81

Figure 4-162. Sandbag bumping. 

Sandbag Bumping 

Sandbag bumping is one of the most difficult methods of 
hand forming sheet metal because there is no exact forming 
block to guide the operation. [Figure 4-162] In this method, 
a depression is made into the sandbag to take the shape of 
the hammered portion of the metal. The depression or pit has 
a tendency to shift from the hammering, which necessitates 
periodic readjustment during the bumping process. The 
degree of shifting depends largely on the contour or shape 
of the piece being formed, and whether glancing blows must 
be struck to stretch, draw, or shrink the metal. When forming 
by this method, prepare a contour template or some sort of 
a pattern to serve as a working guide and to ensure accuracy 
of the finished part. Make the pattern from ordinary kraft or 
similar paper, folding it over the part to be duplicated. Cut the 
paper cover at the points where it would have to be stretched 
to fit, and attach additional pieces of paper with masking tape 
to cover the exposed portions. After completely covering the 
part, trim the pattern to exact size.

Open the pattern and spread it out on the metal from which 
the part is to be formed. Although the pattern does not lie flat, 
it gives a fairly accurate idea of the approximate shape of the 
metal to be cut, and the pieced-in sections indicate where the 
metal is to be stretched. When the pattern has been placed on 
the material, outline the part and the portions to be stretched 
using a felt-tipped pen. Add at least 1-inch of excess metal 
when cutting the material to size. Trim off the excess metal 
after bumping the part into shape.

If the part to be formed is radially symmetrical, it is fairly 
easy to shape since a simple contour template can be used as a 
working guide. The procedure for bumping sheet metal parts 
on a sandbag follows certain basic steps that can be applied 
to any part, regardless of its contour or shape.

1. Lay out and cut the contour template to serve as a 
working guide and to ensure accuracy of the finished 
part. (This can be made of sheet metal, medium to 
heavy cardboard, kraft paper, or thin plywood.)

2. Determine the amount of metal needed, lay it out, and 
cut it to size, allowing at least 1⁄2-inch in excess.

3. Place a sandbag on a solid foundation capable of 
supporting heavy blows and make a pit in the bag with 
a smooth-faced mallet. Analyze the part to determine 
the correct radius the pit should have for the forming 
operation. The pit changes shape with the hammering 
it receives and must be readjusted accordingly. 

4. Select a soft round-faced or bell-shaped mallet with 
a contour slightly smaller than the contour desired on 
the sheet metal part. Hold one edge of the metal in the 
left hand and place the portion to be bumped near the 
edge of the pit on the sandbag. Strike the metal with 
light glancing blows. 

5. Continue bumping toward the center, revolving the 
metal, and working gradually inward until the desired 
shape is obtained. Shape the entire part as a unit.

6. Check the part often for accuracy of shape during the 
bumping process by applying the template. If wrinkles 
form, work them out before they become too large.

7. Remove small dents and hammer marks with a suitable 
stake and planishing hammer or with a hand dolly and 
planishing hammer.

8. Finally, after bumping is completed, use a pair of 
dividers to mark around the outside of the object. Trim 
the edge and file it smooth. Clean and polish the part.

Joggling
A joggle, often found at the intersection of stringers and 
formers, is the offset formed on a part to allow clearance for 
a sheet or another mating part. Use of the joggle maintains 
the smooth surface of a joint or splice. The amount of 
offset is usually small; therefore, the depth of the joggle is 
generally specified in thousandths of an inch. The thickness 
of the material to be cleared governs the depth of the joggle. 
In determining the necessary length of the joggle, allow an 
extra 1⁄16-inch to give enough added clearance to assure a fit 
between the joggled, overlapped part. The distance between 
the two bends of a joggle is called the allowance. This 
dimension is normally called out on the drawing. However, 
a general rule of thumb for figuring allowance is four times 
the thickness of the displacement of flat sheets. For 90° 
angles, it must be slightly more due to the stress built up 
at the radius while joggling. For extrusions, the allowance 
can be as much as 12 times the material thickness, so, it is 
important to follow the drawing.


4-82

Clamping deviceMaterial being joggled

Joggle block

Joggle block

Wooden mallet

Bulge caused by forming joggle

STEP 1

Place material between joggle blocks and 
squeeze in a vice or other clamping device.

STEP 2

Turn joggle blocks over in vice and flatten
bulge with wooden mallet.

Figure 4-163. Forming joggle using joggle blocks.

Figure 4-164. Samples of joggled metal.

There are a number of different methods of forming 
joggles. For example, if the joggle is to be made 
on a straight flange or flat piece of metal, it can be 
formed on a cornice brake. To form the joggle, use the  
following procedure: 

1. Lay out the boundary lines of the joggle where the 
bends are to occur on the sheet.

2. Insert the sheet in the brake and bend the metal up 
approximately 20° to 30°. 

3. Release the brake and remove the part.

4. Turn the part over and clamp it in the brake at the 
second bend line.

5. Bend the part up until the correct height of the joggle 
is attained.

6. Remove the part from the brake and check the joggle 
for correct dimensions and clearance.

 
When a joggle is necessary on a curved part or a curved 
flange, forming blocks or dies made of hardwood, steel, 
or aluminum alloy may be used. The forming procedure 
consists of placing the part to be joggled between the two 
joggle blocks and squeezing them in a vice or some other 
suitable clamping device. After the joggle is formed, the 
joggle blocks are turned over in the vice and the bulge on 
the opposite flange is flattened with a wooden or rawhide 
mallet. [Figure 4-163]

Since hardwood is easily worked, dies made of hardwood are 
satisfactory when the die is to be used only a few times. If 
a number of similar joggles are to be produced, use steel or 
aluminum alloy dies. Dies of aluminum alloy are preferred 
since they are easier to fabricate than those of steel and wear 
about as long. These dies are sufficiently soft and resilient 
to permit forming aluminum alloy parts on them without 
marring, and nicks and scratches are easily removed from 
their surfaces.

When using joggling dies for the first time, test them for 
accuracy on a piece of waste stock to avoid the possibility 
of ruining already fabricated parts. [Figure 4-164] Always 
keep the surfaces of the blocks free from dirt, filings, and 
the like, so that the work is not marred. 

Lightning Holes
Lightning holes are cut in rib sections, fuselage frames, and 
other structural parts to decrease weight. To avoid weakening
the member by removal of the material, flanges are often 
pressed around the holes to strengthen the area from which 
the material was removed.


4-83

500

300

150

80–30

29–U

3/8

Drill Size Maximum RPM

Figure 4-165. Lightening hole die set.

Figure 4-166. Drill size and speed for drilling Inconel.

Lightning holes should never be cut in any structural part 
unless authorized. The size of the lightning hole and the 
width of the flange formed around the hole are determined by 
design specifications. Margins of safety are considered in the 
specifications so that the weight of the part can be decreased 
and still retain the necessary strength. Lightning holes may 
be cut with a hole saw, a punch, or a fly cutter. The edges 
are filed smooth to prevent them from cracking or tearing.

Flanging Lightning Holes

Form the flange by using a flanging die, or hardwood or 
metal form blocks. Flanging dies consist of two matching 
parts: a female and a male die. For flanging soft metal, dies 
can be of hardwood, such as maple. For hard metal or for 
more permanent use, they should be made of steel. The pilot 
guide should be the same size as the hole to be flanged, 
and the shoulder should be the same width and angle as the 
desired flange.

When flanging lightning holes, place the material between 
the mating parts of the die and form it by hammering or 
squeezing the dies together in a vise or in an arbor press (a 
small hand operated press). The dies work more smoothly 
if they are coated with light machine oil. [Figure 4-165]

Working Stainless Steel
Corrosion-resistant-steel (CRES) sheet is used on some 
parts of the aircraft when high strength is required. CRES 
causes magnesium, aluminum, or cadmium to corrode when 
it touches these metals. To isolate CRES from magnesium 
and aluminum, apply a finish that gives protection between 
their mating surfaces. It is important to use a bend radius 
that is larger than the recommended minimum bend radius 
to prevent cracking of the material in the bend area. 

When working with stainless steel, make sure that the metal 
does not become unduly scratched or marred. Also, take special 
precautions when shearing, punching, or drilling this metal. It 
takes about twice as much pressure to shear or punch stainless 
steel as it does mild steel. Keep the shear or punch and die 

adjusted very closely. Too much clearance permits the metal 
to be drawn over the edge of the die and causes it to become 
work hardened, resulting in excessive strain on the machine. 
When drilling stainless steel, use an HSS drill bit ground to 
an included angle of 135°. Keep the drill speed about one-half 
that required for drilling mild steel, but never exceed 750 rpm. 
Keep a uniform pressure on the drill so the feed is constant at 
all times. Drill the material on a backing plate, such as cast iron, 
which is hard enough to permit the drill bit to cut completely 
through the stock without pushing the metal away from the drill 
point. Spot the drill bit before turning on the power and also 
make sure that pressure is exerted when the power is turned on.

Working Inconel® Alloys 625 and 718
Inconel® refers to a family of nickel-chromium-iron super 
alloys typically used in high-temperature applications. 
Corrosion resistance and the ability to stay strong in high 
temperatures led to the frequent use of these Inconel® alloys 
in aircraft powerplant structures. Inconel® alloys 625 and 718 
can be cold formed by standard procedures used for steel 
and stainless steel.

Normal drilling into Inconel® alloys can break drill bits 
sooner and cause damage to the edge of the hole when the 
drill bit goes through the metal. If a hand drill is used to 
drill Inconel® alloys 625 and 718, select a 135° cobalt drill 
bit. When hand drilling, push hard on the drill, but stay at 
a constant chip rate. For example, with a No. 30 hole, push 
the drill with approximately 50 pounds of force. Use the 
maximum drill rpm as illustrated in Figure 4-166. A cutting 
fluid is not necessary when hand drilling.

The following drilling procedures are recommended: 

• Drill pilot holes in loose repair parts with power feed 
equipment before preassembling them.

• Preassemble the repair parts and drill the pilot holes 
in the mating structure.

• Enlarge the pilot holes to their completed hole 
dimension.

When drilling Inconel®, autofeed-type drilling equipment 
is preferred. 


4-84

Working Magnesium
Warning: Keep magnesium particles away from sources of 
ignition. Small particles of magnesium burn very easily. 
In sufficient concentration, these small particles can cause 
an explosion. If water touches molten magnesium, a steam 
explosion could occur. Extinguish magnesium fires with dry 
talc, calcium carbonate, sand, or graphite. Apply the powder 
on the burning metal to a depth of 1⁄2-inch or more. Do not 
use foam, water, carbon tetrachloride, or carbon dioxide. 
Magnesium alloys must not touch methyl alcohol.

Magnesium is the world’s lightest structural metal. Like 
many other metals, this silvery-white element is not used in 
its pure state for stressed application. Instead, magnesium 
is alloyed with certain other metals (aluminum, zinc, 
zirconium, manganese, thorium, and rare earth metals) to 
obtain the strong, lightweight alloys needed for structural 
uses. When alloyed with these other metals, magnesium, 
yields alloys with excellent properties and high strength-
to-weight ratios. Proper combination of these alloying 
constituents provide alloys suitable for sand, permanent 
mold and die castings, forging, extrusions, rolled sheet, and 
plate with good properties at room temperature, as well as at 
elevated temperatures. 

Lightweight is the best known characteristic of magnesium, 
an important factor in aircraft design. In comparison, 
aluminum weighs one and one half times more, iron and steel 
weigh four times more, and copper and nickel alloys weigh 
five times more. Magnesium alloys can be cut, drilled, and 
reamed with the same tools that are used on steel or brass, 
but the cutting edges of the tool must be sharp. Type B rivets 
(5056-F aluminum alloy) are used when riveting magnesium 
alloy parts. Magnesium parts are often repaired with clad 
2024-T3 aluminum alloy. 

While magnesium alloys can usually be fabricated by methods 
similar to those used on other metals, remember that many 
of the details of shop practice cannot be applied. Magnesium 
alloys are difficult to fabricate at room temperature; therefore, 
most operations must be performed at high temperatures. This 
requires preheating of the metal or dies, or both. Magnesium 
alloy sheets may be cut by blade shears, blanking dies, 
routers, or saws. Hand or circular saws are usually used 
for cutting extrusions to length. Conventional shears and 
nibblers should never be used for cutting magnesium alloy 
sheet because they produce a rough, cracked edge. 

Shearing and blanking of magnesium alloys require close 
tool tolerances. A maximum clearance of 3 to 5 percent of 
the sheet thickness is recommended. The top blade of the 
shears should be ground with an included angle of 45° to 60º. 
The shear angle on a punch should be from 2° to 3°, with a 

1° clearance angle on the die. For blanking, the shear angle 
on the die should be from 2° to 3° with a 1° clearance angle 
on the punch. Hold-down pressures should be used when 
possible. Cold shearing should not be accomplished on a 
hard-rolled sheet thicker than 0.064-inch or annealed sheet 
thicker than 1⁄8-inch. Shaving is used to smooth the rough, 
flaky edges of a magnesium sheet that has been sheared. 
This operation consists of removing approximately 1⁄32-inch 
by a second shearing. 

Hot shearing is sometimes used to obtain an improved 
sheared edge. This is necessary for heavy sheet and plate 
stock. Annealed sheet may be heated to 600 °F, but hard-
rolled sheet must be held under 400 °F, depending on the 
alloy used. Thermal expansion makes it necessary to allow for 
shrinkage after cooling, which entails adding a small amount 
of material to the cold metal dimensions before fabrication.

Sawing is the only method used in cutting plate stock more 
than 1⁄2-inch thick. Bandsaw raker-set blades of 4- to 6-tooth 
pitch are recommended for cutting plate stock or heavy 
extrusions. Small and medium extrusions are more easily 
cut on a circular cutoff saw having six teeth per inch. Sheet 
stock can be cut on handsaws having raker-set or straight-set 
teeth with an 8-tooth pitch. Bandsaws should be equipped 
with nonsparking blade guides to eliminate the danger of 
sparks igniting the magnesium alloy filings.

Cold working most magnesium alloys at room temperature 
is very limited, because they work harden rapidly and do not 
lend themselves to any severe cold forming. Some simple 
bending operations may be performed on sheet material, but 
the radius of bend must be at least 7 times the thickness of 
the sheet for soft material and 12 times the thickness of the 
sheet for hard material. A radius of 2 or 3 times the thickness 
of the sheet can be used if the material is heated for the 
forming operation.

Since wrought magnesium alloys tend to crack after they 
are cold-worked, the best results are obtained if the metal is 
heated to 450 °F before any forming operations are attempted. 
Parts formed at the lower temperature range are stronger 
because the higher temperature range has an annealing effect 
on the metal.

The disadvantages of hot working magnesium are:

1. Heating the dies and the material is expensive  
and troublesome. 

2. There are problems in lubricating and handling 
materials at these temperatures.


4-85

The advantages to hot working magnesium are:

1. It is more easily formed when hot than are other 
metals.

2. Spring-back is reduced, resulting in greater dimensional 
accuracy.

When heating magnesium and its alloys, watch the 
temperature carefully as the metal is easily burned. 
Overheating also causes small molten pools to form within 
the metal. In either case, the metal is ruined. To prevent 
burning, magnesium must be protected with a sulfur dioxide 
atmosphere while being heated.

Proper bending around a short radius requires the removal of 
sharp corners and burrs near the bend line. Layouts should 
be made with a carpenter’s soft pencil because any marring 
of the surface may result in fatigue cracks.

Press brakes can be used for making bends with short radii. 
Die and rubber methods should be used where bends are 
to be made at right angles, which complicate the use of a 
brake. Roll forming may be accomplished cold on equipment 
designed for forming aluminum. The most common method 
of forming and shallow drawing of magnesium is to use a 
rubber pad as the female die. This rubber pad is held in an 
inverted steel pan that is lowered by a hydraulic press ram. 
The press exerts pressure on the metal and bends it to the 
shape of the male die.

The machining characteristics of magnesium alloys are 
excellent, making possible the use of maximum speeds of 
the machine tools with heavy cuts and high feed rates. Power 
requirements for machining magnesium alloys are about 
one-sixth of those for mild steel.

Filings, shavings, and chips from machining operations 
should be kept in covered metal containers because of the 
danger of combustion. Do not use magnesium alloys in 
liquid deicing and water injection systems or in the integral 
fuel tank areas.

Working Titanium
Keep titanium particles away from sources of ignition. 
Small particles of titanium burn very easily. In sufficient 
concentration, these small particles can cause an explosion. 
If water touches molten titanium, a steam explosion could 
occur. Extinguish titanium fires with dry talc, calcium 
carbonate, sand, or graphite. Apply the powder on the burning 
metal to a depth of 1⁄2-inch or more. Do not use foam, water, 
carbon tetrachloride, or carbon dioxide.

Description of Titanium
Titanium in its mineral state, is the fourth most abundant 
structural metal in the earth’s crust. It is lightweight, 
nonmagnetic, strong, corrosion resistant, and ductile. 
Titanium lies between the aluminum alloys and stainless 
steel in modulus, density, and strength at intermediate 
temperatures. Titanium is 30 percent stronger than steel, 
but is nearly 50 percent lighter. It is 60 percent heavier than 
aluminum, but twice as strong.

Titanium and its alloys are used chiefly for parts that require 
good corrosion resistance, moderate strength up to 600 °F 
(315 °C), and lightweight. Commercially pure titanium 
sheet may be formed by hydropress, stretch press, brake 
roll forming, drop hammer, or other similar operations. It is 
more difficult to form than annealed stainless steel. Titanium 
can also be worked by grinding, drilling, sawing, and the 
types of working used on other metals. Titanium must be 
isolated from magnesium, aluminum, or alloy steel because 
galvanic corrosion or oxidation of the other metals occurs 
upon contact.

Monel® rivets or standard close-tolerance steel fasteners 
should be used when installing titanium parts. The alloy 
sheet can be formed, to a limited extent, at room temperature. 
The forming of titanium alloys is divided into three classes:

• Cold forming with no stress relief

• Cold forming with stress relief

• Elevated temperature forming (built-in stress relief)

Over 5 percent of all titanium in the United States is produced 
in the form of the alloy Ti 6Al-4V, which is known as the 
workhorse of the titanium industry. Used in aircraft turbine 
engine components and aircraft structural components, Ti 
6Al-4V is approximately 3 times stronger than pure titanium. 
The most widely used titanium alloy, it is hard to form. 

The following are procedures for cold forming titanium 6Al-
4V annealed with stress relief (room temperature forming):

1. It is important to use a minimum radius chart when 
forming titanium because an excessively small radius 
introduces excess stress to the bend area.

2. Stress relieves the part as follows: heat the part to 
a temperature above 1,250 °F (677 °C), but below 
1,450 °F (788 °C). Keep the part at this temperature 
for more than 30 minutes but less than 10 hours.

3. A powerful press brake is required to form titanium 
parts. Regular hand-operated box and pan brakes 
cannot form titanium sheet material.


4-86

920 to 1830 rpm

460 to 920 rpm

230 to 460 rpm

0.0625

0.125

0.1875

Hole Size (inches) Drill Speed (rpm)

Figure 4-167. Hole size and drill speed for drilling titanium.

4. A power slip roller is often used if the repair patch 
needs to be curved to fit the contour of the aircraft. 

Titanium can be difficult to drill, but standard high-speed 
drill bits may be used if the bits are sharp, if sufficient force 
is applied, and if a low-speed drill motor is used. If the drill 
bit is dull, or if it is allowed to ride in a partially drilled hole, 
an overheated condition is created, making further drilling 
extremely difficult. Therefore, keep holes as shallow as 
possible; use short, sharp drill bits of approved design; and 
flood the area with large amounts of cutting fluid to facilitate 
drilling or reaming. 

When working titanium, it is recommended that you 
use carbide or 8 percent cobalt drill bits, reamers, and 
countersinks. Ensure the drill or reamer is rotating to prevent 
scoring the side of the hole when removing either of them 
from a hole. Use a hand drill only when positive-power-feed 
drills are not available. 

The following guidelines are used for drilling titanium:

• The largest diameter hole that can be drilled in a single 
step is 0.1563-inch because a large force is required. 
Larger diameter drill bits do not cut satisfactorily 
when much force is used. Drill bits that do not cut 
satisfactorily cause damage to the hole.

• Holes with a diameter of 0.1875-inch and larger can 
be hand drilled if the operator:

- Starts with a hole with a diameter of 0.1563-inch.

- Increases the diameter of the hole in 0.0313-inch 
or 0.0625-inch increments.

• Cobalt vanadium drill bits last much longer than HSS 
bits.

• The recommended drill motor rpm settings for hand 
drilling titanium are listed in Figure 4-167.

• The life of a drill bit is shorter when drilling titanium 
than when drilling steel. Do not use a blunt drill bit 
or let a drill bit rub the surface of the metal and not 
cut it. If one of these conditions occurs, the titanium 
surface becomes work hardened, and it is very difficult 
to start the drill again.

• When hand drilling two or more titanium parts at the 
same time, clamp them together tightly. To clamp 

them together, use temporary bolts, Cleco clamps, or 
tooling clamps. Put the clamps around the area to drill 
and as near the area as possible.

• When hand drilling thin or flexible parts, put a support 
(such as a block of wood) behind the part. 

• Titanium has a low thermal conductivity. When it 
becomes hot, other metals become easily attached to 
it. Particles of titanium often become welded to the 
sharp edges of the drill bit if the drill speed is too high. 
When drilling large plates or extrusions, use a water 
soluble coolant or sulphurized oil.

NOTE: The intimate metal-to-metal contact in the metal 
working process creates heat and friction that must be 
reduced or the tools and the sheet metal used in the process 
are quickly damaged and/or destroyed. Coolants, also called 
cutting fluids, are used to reduce the friction at the interface 
of the tool and sheet metal by transferring heat away from the 
tool and sheet metal. Thus, the use of cutting fluids increases 
productivity, extends tool life, and results in a higher quality 
of workmanship.

Basic Principles of Sheet Metal Repair
Aircraft structural members are designed to perform a 
specific function or to serve a definite purpose. The primary 
objective of aircraft repair is to restore damaged parts to their 
original condition. Very often, replacement is the only way 
this can be done effectively. When repair of a damaged part 
is possible, first study the part carefully to fully understand 
its purpose or function.

Strength may be the principal requirement in the repair of 
certain structures, while others may need entirely different 
qualities. For example, fuel tanks and floats must be protected 
against leakage; cowlings, fairings, and similar parts must 
have such properties as neat appearance, streamlined 
shape, and accessibility. The function of any damaged part 
must be carefully determined to ensure the repair meets 
the requirements.

An inspection of the damage and accurate estimate of the type 
of repair required are the most important steps in repairing 
structural damage. The inspection includes an estimate of the 
best type and shape of repair patch to use; the type, size, and 
number of rivets needed; and the strength, thickness, and kind 
of material required to make the repaired member no heavier 
(or only slightly heavier) and just as strong as the original. 

When investigating damage to an aircraft, it is necessary to 
make an extensive inspection of the structure. When any 
component or group of components has been damaged, it is 
essential that both the damaged members and the attaching 


4-87

structure be investigated, since the damaging force may have 
been transmitted over a large area, sometimes quite remote 
from the point of original damage. Wrinkled skin, elongated 
or damaged bolt or rivet holes, or distortion of members 
usually appears in the immediate area of such damage, and 
any one of these conditions calls for a close inspection of 
the adjacent area. Check all skin, dents, and wrinkles for any 
cracks or abrasions. 

Nondestructive inspection methods (NDI) are used as 
required when inspecting damage. NDI methods serve as 
tools of prevention that allow defects to be detected before 
they develop into serious or hazardous failures. A trained 
and experienced technician can detect flaws or defects with 
a high degree of accuracy and reliability. Some of the defects 
found by NDI include corrosion, pitting, heat/stress cracks, 
and discontinuity of metals.

When investigating damage, proceed as follows:

• Remove all dirt, grease, and paint from the damaged 
and surrounding areas to determine the exact condition 
of each rivet, bolt, and weld.

• Inspect skin for wrinkles throughout a large area.

• Check the operation of all movable parts in the area.

• Determine if repair would be the best procedure.

In any aircraft sheet metal repair, it is critical to:

• Maintain original strength,

• Maintain original contour, and

• Minimize weight.

Maintaining Original Strength
Certain fundamental rules must be observed if the original 
strength of the structure is to be maintained.

Ensure that the cross-sectional area of a splice or patch is 
at least equal to or greater than that of the damaged part. 
Avoid abrupt changes in cross-sectional area. Eliminate 
dangerous stress concentration by tapering splices. To 
reduce the possibility of cracks starting from the corners of 
cutouts, try to make cutouts either circular or oval in shape. 
Where it is necessary to use a rectangular cutout, make the 
radius of curvature at each corner no smaller than 1⁄2-inch. If 
the member is subjected to compression or bending loads, 
the patch should be placed on the outside of the member to 
obtain a higher resistance to such loads. If the patch cannot 
be placed there, material one gauge thicker than the original 
shall be used for the repair. 

Replace buckled or bent members or reinforce them by 
attaching a splice over the affected area. A buckled part of the 
structure shall not be depended upon to carry its load again, 
no matter how well the part may be strengthened. 

The material used in all replacements or reinforcements must 
be similar to that used in the original structure. If an alloy 
weaker than the original must be substituted for it, a heavier 
thickness must be used to give equivalent cross-sectional 
strength. A material that is stronger, but thinner, cannot be 
substituted for the original because one material can have 
greater tensile strength but less compressive strength than 
another, or vice versa. Also, the buckling and torsional strength 
of many sheet metal and tubular parts depends primarily on the 
thickness of the material rather than its allowable compressive 
and shear strengths. The manufacturer’s SRM often indicates 
what material can be used as a substitution and how much 
thicker the material needs to be. Figure 4-168 is an example 
of a substitution table found in an SRM. 

Care must be taken when forming. Heat-treated and cold-
worked aluminum alloys stand very little bending without 
cracking. On the other hand, soft alloys are easily formed, 
but they are not strong enough for primary structure. Strong 
alloys can be formed in their annealed (heated and allowed 
to cool slowly) condition, and heat treated before assembling 
to develop their strength.

The size of rivets for any repair can be determined by 
referring to the rivets used by the manufacturer in the next 
parallel rivet row inboard on the wing or forward on the 
fuselage. Another method of determining the size of rivets to 
be used is to multiply the thickness of the skin by three and 
use the next larger size rivet corresponding to that figure. For 
example, if the skin thickness is 0.040-inch, multiply 0.040-
inch by 3, which equals 0.120-inch; use the next larger size 

rivet, 1⁄8-inch (0.125-inch). The number of rivets to be used 
for a repair can be found in tables in manufacturer’s SRMs or 
in Advisory Circular (AC) 43.13-1 (as revised), Acceptable 
Methods, Techniques, and Practices—Aircraft Inspection 
and Repair. Figure 4-169 is a table from AC 43.13-1 that is 
used to calculate the number of rivets required for a repair. 

Extensive repairs that are made too strong can be as 
undesirable as repairs weaker than the original structure. All 
aircraft structure must flex slightly to withstand the forces 
imposed during takeoff, flight, and landing. If a repaired 
area is too strong, excessive flexing occurs at the edge of 
the completed repair, causing acceleration of metal fatigue.


4-88

Clad  2024–T3
2024–T3

Clad  7075–T6
7075–T6

2024–T3
Clad  7075–T6

7075–T6

7075–T6

7075–T6

Clad  2024–T42

Clad  2024–T3

Clad  7075–T6

          2024–T42

Sheet
0.016 to 0.125

Formed or
Extruded Section 

Initial MaterialShape
Replacement

Material

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.28
1.08
1.00

1.10
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.28
1.18
1.00

1.83
1.76
1.10
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
1.83
1.00

1.20
1.13
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.86
1.75
1.00

1.20
1.13
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.50
1.41
1.00

1.24
1.16
1.03
1.03
1.00
1.00
1.96
1.81
1.00

1.84
1.76
1.14
1.00
1.14
1.00
1.98
1.81
1.00

1.78
1.71
1.10
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.90
1.75
1.00

1.78
1.70
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.90
1.75
1.00

1.30
1.22
1.09
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.63
1.52
1.00

7075–T6
Clad  7075–T6
2024–T3
Clad  2024–T3
2024–T42
Clad  2024–T42
7178–T6
Clad  7178–T6
5052–H34

Notes
• All dimensions are in inches, unless given differently.

• It is possible that more protection from corrosion 
 will be necessary when bare mineral is used to 
 replace Clad material. Refer to 51-10-2.

• It is possible for the material replacement factor 
 to be a lower value for a specific location on the 
 airplane. To get that value, contact Boeing for a 
 case by case analysis.

• Refer to Figure 3 for minimun bend radii.

• Example:
      To refer 0.040 thick 7075–T6 with Clad 7075–T6, 
      multiply the gage by the material replacement factor 
      to get the replacement gage 0. 040 x 1.10 = 0.045. 

These materials cannot be used as replacements for the 
initial material in areas that are pressured.

They also cannot be used in the wing interspar structure at 
the wing center section structure. 

Use the next thicker standard gage when you use a formed 
section as a replacement for an extrusion.

For all gages of flat sheet and formed sections.

For flat sheet less than 0.071 thick.

For flat sheet 0.071 thick and thicker, and for formed sections.

2024–T4 and 2024–T42 are equivalent.

A compound to give protection from corrosion must be 
applied to bare material that is used to replace 5052–H34.

Sheet
Material
to be
Replaced

7075–T6 2024–T3
Clad
7075–T6

Clad
2024–T3

2024–T4
2024–T42

Clad  2024–T4
Clad  2024–T42

Material Replacement Factor

C

C

A
A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

B

B

D

D

C H

H

H

G

G

E

E

D E D E

F F

F

F

F

D E

Figure 4-168. Material substitution.

Shear Strength and Bearing Strength
Aircraft structural joint design involves an attempt to find 
the optimum strength relationship between being critical in 
shear and critical in bearing. These are determined by the 
failure mode affecting the joint. The joint is critical in shear 
if less than the optimum number of fasteners of a given size 

are installed. This means that the rivets will fail, and not 
the sheet, if the joint fails. The joint is critical in bearing if 
more than the optimum number of fasteners of a given size 
are installed; the material may crack and tear between holes, 
or fastener holes may distort and stretch while the fasteners 
remain intact.


4-89

 6.5
 6.5
 6.9
 8.9
10.0
11.1

- - 
- - 
- - 
- - 
- - 
- - 

4.9
4.9
4.9
4.9
5.6
6.2
7.9
9.9

12.5
- - 
- - 
- - 

 - -
 - -
 - -
 - -
 - -
 - -
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3

- - 
3.9
3.9
3.9
3.9
4.0
5.1
6.5
8.1
9.1

10.3
12.9

 - -
 - -
 - -
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.6
4.5
5.7
6.3
7.1
8.9

- - 
- - 
- - 
- - 
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.5
3.1
3.5
3.9
4.9

.016

.020

.025

.032

.036

.040

.051

.064

.081

.091

.102

.128

Thickness
“t” in

inches

No. of
Bolts

No. of 2117–T4 (AD) protruding head rivets required 
per inch of width “W”

Rivet size

1/43/165/323/32 AN–31/8

Notes
 a. For stringer in the upper surface of a wing, or in a fuselage, 80 percent of the number of rivets shown in the table 
  may be used.
 b. For intermediate frames, 60 percent of the number shown may be used.
 c. For single lap sheet joints, 75 percent of the number shown may be used.

Engineering Notes
 a. The load per inch of width of material was calculated by assuming a strip 1 inch wide in tension.
 b. Number of rivets required was calculated for 2117–T4 (AD) rivets, based on a rivet allowable shear stress equal to 
  percent of the sheet allowable tensile stress, and a sheet allowable bearing stress equal to 160 percent of the sheet 
  allowable tensile stress, using nominal hole diameters for rivets.
 c. Combinations of shoot thickness and rivet size above the underlined numbers are critical in (i.e., will fail by) bearing 
  on the sheet; those below are critical in shearing of the rivets.
 d. The number of AN–3 bolts required below the underlined number was calculated based on a sheet allowable tensile 
  stress of 55.000 psi and a bolt allowable single shear load of 2.126 pounds.

Figure 4-169. Rivet calculation table.

Maintaining Original Contour
Form all repairs in such a manner to fit the original contour 
perfectly. A smooth contour is especially desirable when 
making patches on the smooth external skin of high- 
speed aircraft.

Keeping Weight to a Minimum
Keep the weight of all repairs to a minimum. Make the size 
of the patches as small as practicable and use no more rivets 
than are necessary. In many cases, repairs disturb the original 
balance of the structure. The addition of excessive weight in 
each repair may unbalance the aircraft, requiring adjustment 
of the trim-and-balance tabs. In areas such as the spinner 
on the propeller, a repair requires application of balancing 
patches in order to maintain a perfect balance of the propeller. 
When flight controls are repaired and weight is added, it is 
very important to perform a balancing check to determine if 
the flight control is still within its balance limitations. Failure 
to do so could result in flight control flutter.

Flutter and Vibration Precautions
To prevent severe vibration or flutter of flight control surfaces 
during flight, precautions must be taken to stay within the 
design balance limitations when performing maintenance or 
repair. The importance of retaining the proper balance and 
rigidity of aircraft control surfaces cannot be overemphasized. 
The effect of repair or weight change on the balance and CG 
is proportionately greater on lighter surfaces than on the older 
heavier designs. As a general rule, repair the control surface 
in such a manner that the weight distribution is not affected 
in any way, in order to preclude the occurrence of flutter 
of the control surface in flight. Under certain conditions, 
counterbalance weight is added forward of the hinge line to 
maintain balance. Add or remove balance weights only when 
necessary in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 
Flight testing must be accomplished to ensure flutter is not a 
problem. Failure to check and retain control surface balance 
within the original or maximum allowable value could result 
in a serious flight hazard.


4-90

Aircraft manufacturers use different repair techniques and 
repairs designed and approved for one type of aircraft are 
not automatically approved for other types of aircraft. When 
repairing a damaged component or part, consult the applicable 
section of the manufacturer’s SRM for the aircraft. Usually 
the SRM contains an illustration for a similar repair along 
with a list of the types of material, rivets and rivet spacing, 
and the methods and procedures to be used. Any additional 
knowledge needed to make a repair is also detailed. If the 
necessary information is not found in the SRM, attempt to 
find a similar repair or assembly installed by the manufacturer 
of the aircraft.

Inspection of Damage 
When visually inspecting damage, remember that there may 
be other kinds of damage than that caused by impact from 
foreign objects or collision. A rough landing may overload one 
of the landing gear, causing it to become sprung; this would 
be classified as load damage. During inspection and sizing up 
of the repair job, consider how far the damage caused by the 
sprung shock strut extends to supporting structural members.

A shock occurring at one end of a member is transmitted 
throughout its length; therefore, closely inspect all rivets, 
bolts, and attaching structures along the complete member 
for any evidence of damage. Make a close examination for 
rivets that have partially failed and for holes that have been 
elongated.

Whether specific damage is suspected or not, an aircraft 
structure must occasionally be inspected for structural 
integrity. The following paragraphs provide general 
guidelines for this inspection.

When inspecting the structure of an aircraft, it is very 
important to watch for evidence of corrosion on the inside. 
This is most likely to occur in pockets and corners where 
moisture and salt spray may accumulate; therefore, drain 
holes must always be kept clean.

While an injury to the skin covering caused by impact with an 
object is plainly evident, a defect, such as distortion or failure 
of the substructure, may not be apparent until some evidence 
develops on the surface, such as canted, buckled or wrinkled 
covering, and loose rivets or working rivets. A working rivet 
is one that has movement under structural stress, but has not 
loosened to the extent that movement can be observed. This 
situation can sometimes be noted by a dark, greasy residue or 
deterioration of paint and primers around rivet heads. External 
indications of internal injury must be watched for and correctly 
interpreted. When found, an investigation of the substructure 
in the vicinity should be made and corrective action taken.

Warped wings are usually indicated by the presence of 
parallel skin wrinkles running diagonally across the wings 
and extending over a major area. This condition may develop 
from unusually violent maneuvers, extremely rough air, or 
extra hard landings. While there may be no actual rupture of 
any part of the structure, it may be distorted and weakened. 
Similar failures may also occur in fuselages. Small cracks in 
the skin covering may be caused by vibration and they are 
frequently found leading away from rivets.

Aluminum alloy surfaces having chipped protective coating, 
scratches, or worn spots that expose the surface of the metal 
should be recoated at once, as corrosion may develop rapidly. 
The same principle is applied to aluminum clad (Alclad™) 
surfaces. Scratches, which penetrate the pure aluminum 
surface layer, permit corrosion to take place in the alloy 
beneath.

A simple visual inspection cannot accurately determine if 
suspected cracks in major structural members actually exist 
or the full extent of the visible cracks. Eddy current and 
ultrasonic inspection techniques are used to find hidden 
damage.

Types of Damage and Defects
Types of damage and defects that may be observed on aircraft 
parts are defined as follows:

• Brinelling—occurrence of shallow, spherical 
depressions in a surface, usually produced by a part 
having a small radius in contact with the surface under 
high load.

• Burnishing—polishing of one surface by sliding 
contact with a smooth, harder surface. Usually there 
is no displacement or removal of metal.

• Burr—a small, thin section of metal extending beyond 
a regular surface, usually located at a corner or on the 
edge of a hole.

• Corrosion—loss of metal from the surface by chemical 
or electrochemical action. The corrosion products 
generally are easily removed by mechanical means. 
Iron rust is an example of corrosion.

• Crack—a physical separation of two adjacent portions 
of metal, evidenced by a fine or thin line across the 
surface caused by excessive stress at that point. It 
may extend inward from the surface from a few 
thousandths of an inch to completely through the 
section thickness.

• Cut—loss of metal, usually to an appreciable depth 
over a relatively long and narrow area, by mechanical 


4-91

Crack

Stop-drill cracks

Figure 4-170. Repair of cracks by stop-drilling.

means, as would occur with the use of a saw blade, 
chisel, or sharp-edged stone striking a glancing blow.

• Dent—indentation in a metal surface produced by an 
object striking with force. The surface surrounding 
the indentation is usually slightly upset.

• Erosion—loss of metal from the surface by 
mechanical action of foreign objects, such as grit or 
fine sand. The eroded area is rough and may be lined 
in the direction in which the foreign material moved 
relative to the surface.

• Chattering—breakdown or deterioration of metal 
surface by vibratory or chattering action. Although 
chattering may give the general appearance of metal 
loss or surface cracking, usually, neither has occurred.

• Galling—breakdown (or build-up) of metal surfaces 
due to excessive friction between two parts having 
relative motion. Particles of the softer metal are torn 
loose and welded to the harder metal.

• Gouge—groove in, or breakdown of, a metal surface 
from contact with foreign material under heavy 
pressure. Usually it indicates metal loss but may be 
largely the displacement of material.

• Inclusion—presence of foreign or extraneous material 
wholly within a portion of metal. Such material is 
introduced during the manufacture of rod, bar or 
tubing by rolling or forging.

• Nick—local break or notch on an edge. Usually it 
involves the displacement of metal rather than loss.

• Pitting—sharp, localized breakdown (small, deep 
cavity) of metal surface, usually with defined edges.

• Scratch—slight tear or break in metal surface from 
light, momentary contact by foreign material.

• Score—deeper (than scratch) tear or break in metal 
surface from contact under pressure. May show 
discoloration from temperature produced by friction.

• Stain—a change in color, locally causing a noticeably 
different appearance from the surrounding area.

• Upsetting—a displacement of material beyond the 
normal contour or surface (a local bulge or bump). 
Usually it indicates no metal loss.

 
Classification of Damage
Damages may be grouped into four general classes. In many 
cases, the availabilities of repair materials and time are the 
most important factors in determining if a part should be 
repaired or replaced.

Negligible Damage
Negligible damage consists of visually apparent, surface 
damage that do not affect the structural integrity of the 
component involved. Negligible damage may be left as is or 
may be corrected by a simple procedure without restricting 
flight. In both cases, some corrective action must be taken to 
keep the damage from spreading. Negligible or minor damage 
areas must be inspected frequently to ensure the damage does 
not spread. Permissible limits for negligible damage vary 
for different components of different aircraft and should be 
carefully researched on an individual basis. Failure to ensure 
that damages within the specified limit of negligible damage 
may result in insufficient structural strength of the affected 
support member for critical flight conditions.

Small dents, scratches, cracks, and holes that can be repaired 
by smoothing, sanding, stop drilling, or hammering out, or 
otherwise repaired without the use of additional materials, 
fall in this classification. [Figure 4-170]

Damage Repairable by Patching
Damage repairable by patching is any damage exceeding 
negligible damage limits that can be repaired by installing 
splice members to bridge the damaged portion of a structural 
part. The splice members are designed to span the damaged 
areas and to overlap the existing undamaged surrounding 
structure. The splice or patch material used in internal riveted 
and bolted repairs is normally the same type of material as 
the damaged part, but one gauge heavier. In a patch repair, 
filler plates of the same gauge and type of material as that in 
the damaged component may be used for bearing purposes or 
to return the damaged part to its original contour. Structural 
fasteners are applied to members and the surrounding 
structure to restore the original load-carrying characteristics 


4-92

30

1/4 felt glued on

1/4 plywood 
both sides

2 X 3

Canvas or strong 
cloth tacked on 
to cover felt

2 X 8

4
8

2
4

16

30
5 1/45 1/4

2 3/4

CL

CL

4
4

4
2

2
2

3/8

3 5/8

3 5/8

3 5/8

2 1/8

3 9/16
3 5/16
3

7 5/8

7 1/4

6 7/8

5 5/8
2 1/8

6 1/4
5 5/8
4 3/4

Figure 4-171. Aircraft jig used to hold components during repairs.

of the damaged area. The use of patching depends on the 
extent of the damage and the accessibility of the component 
to be repaired.

Damage Repairable by Insertion
Damage must be repaired by insertion when the area is too 
large to be patched or the structure is arranged such that repair 
members would interfere with structural alignment (e.g., in a 
hinge or bulkhead). In this type of repair, the damaged portion 
is removed from the structure and replaced by a member 
identical in material and shape. Splice connections at each 
end of the insertion member provide for load transfer to the 
original structure.

Damage Necessitating Replacement of Parts
Components must be replaced when their location or extent 
of damage makes repair impractical, when replacement is 
more economical than repair, or when the damaged part is 
relatively easy to replace. For example, replacing damaged 
castings, forgings, hinges, and small structural members, 
when available, is more practical than repairing them. Some 
highly stressed members must be replaced because repair 
would not restore an adequate margin of safety.

Repairability of Sheet Metal Structure
The following criteria can be used to help an aircraft technician 
decide upon the repairability of a sheet metal structure:

• Type of damage.

• Type of original material.

• Location of the damage.

• Type of repair required.

• Tools and equipment available to make the repair.

The following methods, procedures, and materials are only 
typical and should not be used as the authority for a repair.

Structural Support During Repair
During repair, the aircraft must be adequately supported to 
prevent further distortion or damage. It is also important that 
the structure adjacent to the repair is supported when it is 
subject to static loads. The aircraft structure can be supported 
adequately by the landing gear or by jacks where the work 
involves a repair, such as removing the control surfaces, 
wing panels, or stabilizers. Cradles must be prepared to hold 
these components while they are removed from the aircraft. 

When the work involves extensive repair of the fuselage, 
landing gear, or wing center section, a jig (a device for 
holding parts in position to maintain their shape) may be 
constructed to distribute the loads while repairs are being 
accomplished. Figure 4-171 shows a typical aircraft jig. 

Always check the applicable aircraft maintenance manual 
for specific support requirements.

Assessment of Damage
Before starting any repair, the extent of damage must be 
fully evaluated to determine if repair is authorized or even 
practical. This evaluation should identify the original material 
used and the type of repair required. The assessment of the 
damage begins with an inspection of riveted joints and an 
inspection for corrosion.

Inspection of Riveted Joints
Inspection consists of examining both the shop and 
manufactured heads and the surrounding skin and structural 
parts for deformities.

During the repair of an aircraft structural part, examine 
adjacent parts to determine the condition of neighboring 
rivets. The presence of chipped or cracked paint around 
the heads may indicate shifted or loose rivets. If the heads 
are tipped or if rivets are loose, they show up in groups of 
several consecutive rivets and are probably tipped in the same 
direction. If heads that appear to be tipped are not in groups 


4-93

Figure 4-172. Smoking rivet.

and are not tipped in the same direction, tipping may have 
occurred during some previous installation.

Inspect rivets that are known to have been critically loaded, 
but that show no visible distortion, by drilling off the head and 
carefully punching out the shank. If upon examination, the 
shank appears joggled and the holes in the sheet misaligned, 
the rivet has failed in shear. In that case, determine what 
is causing the stress and take necessary corrective action. 
Countersunk rivets that show head slippage within the 
countersink or dimple, indicating either sheet bearing failure 
or rivet shear failure, must be replaced.

Joggles in removed rivet shanks indicate partial shear failure. 
Replace these rivets with the next larger size. Also, if the 
rivet holes show elongation, replace the rivets with the next 
larger size. Sheet failures, such as tearouts, cracks between 
rivets, and the like, usually indicate damaged rivets, and the 
complete repair of the joint may require replacement of the 
rivets with the next larger size.

The presence of a black residue around the rivets is not an 
indication of looseness, but it is an indication of movement 
(fretting). The residue, which is aluminum oxide, is formed 
by a small amount of relative motion between the rivet and 
the adjacent surface. This is called fretting corrosion, or 
smoking, because the aluminum dust quickly forms a dark, 
dirty looking trail, like a smoke trail. Sometimes, the thinning 
of the moving pieces can propagate a crack. If a rivet is 
suspected of being defective, this residue may be removed 
with a general purpose abrasive hand pad, such as those 
manufactured by Scotch Brite™, and the surface inspected 
for signs of pitting or cracking. Although the condition 
indicates the component is under significant stress, it does 
not necessarily precipitate cracking. [Figure 4-172] 

Airframe cracking is not necessarily caused by defective 
rivets. It is common practice in the industry to size rivet 
patterns assuming one or more of the rivets is not effective. 
This means that a loose rivet would not necessarily overload 
adjacent rivets to the point of cracking.

Rivet head cracking are acceptable under the following 
conditions:

• The depth of the crack is less than 1⁄8 of the shank 
diameter.

• The width of the crack is less than 1⁄16 of the shank 
diameter.

• The length of the crack is confined to an area 
on the head within a circle having a maximum 
diameter of 11⁄4 times the shank diameter.

• Cracks should not intersect, which creates the 
potential for the loss of a portion of a head. 

Inspection for Corrosion
Corrosion is the gradual deterioration of metal due to a 
chemical or electrochemical reaction with its environment. 
The reaction can be triggered by the atmosphere, moisture, 
or other agents. When inspecting the structure of an aircraft, 
it is important to watch for evidence of corrosion on both the 
outside and inside. Corrosion on the inside is most likely to 
occur in pockets and corners where moisture and salt spray 
may accumulate; therefore, drain holes must always be kept 
clean. Also inspect the surrounding members for evidence 
of corrosion. 

Damage Removal
To prepare a damaged area for repair: 

1. Remove all distorted skin and structure in 
damaged area.

2. Remove damaged material so that the edges of the 
completed repair match existing structure and aircraft 
lines.

3. Round all square corners.

4. Smooth out any abrasions and/or dents.

5. Remove and incorporate into the new repair any 
previous repairs joining the area of the new repair.

Repair Material Selection
The repair material must duplicate the strength of the original 
structure. If an alloy weaker than the original material has 
to be used, a heavier gauge must be used to give equivalent 
cross-sectional strength. A lighter gauge material should not 
be used even when using a stronger alloy.

Repair Parts Layout 
All new sections fabricated for repairing or replacing 
damaged parts in a given aircraft should be carefully laid 
out to the dimensions listed in the applicable aircraft manual 
before fitting the parts into the structure.


4-94

Rivet Selection 
Normally, the rivet size and material should be the same as 
the original rivets in the part being repaired. If a rivet hole has 
been enlarged or deformed, the next larger size rivet must be 
used after reworking the hole. When this is done, the proper 
edge distance for the larger rivet must be maintained. Where 
access to the inside of the structure is impossible and blind 
rivets must be used in making the repair, always consult the 
applicable aircraft maintenance manual for the recommended 
type, size, spacing, and number of rivets needed to replace 
either the original installed rivets or those that are required 
for the type of repair being performed.

Rivet Spacing and Edge Distance
The rivet pattern for a repair must conform to instructions 
in the applicable aircraft manual. The existing rivet pattern 
is used whenever possible.

Corrosion Treatment 
Prior to assembly of repair or replacement parts, make certain 
that all existing corrosion has been removed in the area and 
that the parts are properly insulated one from the other.

Approval of Repair
Once the need for an aircraft repair has been established, Title 
14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) defines the 
approval process. 14 CFR part 43, section 43.13(a) states that 
each person performing maintenance, alteration, or preventive 
maintenance on an aircraft, engine, propeller, or appliance 
shall use the methods, techniques, and practices prescribed in 
the current manufacturer’s maintenance manual or instructions 
for continued airworthiness prepared by its manufacturer, or 
other methods, techniques, or practices acceptable to the  
Administrator. AC 43.13-1 contains methods, techniques, and 
practices acceptable to the Administrator for the inspection 
and repair of nonpressurized areas of civil aircraft, only when 
there are no manufacturer repair or maintenance instructions. 
This data generally pertains to minor repairs. The repairs 
identified in this AC may only be used as a basis for FAA 
approval for major repairs. The repair data may also be used 
as approved data, and the AC chapter, page, and paragraph 
listed in block 8 of FAA Form 337 when:

a.  The user has determined that it is appropriate to the 
product being repaired;

b.  It is directly applicable to the repair being made; and

c.  It is not contrary to manufacturer’s data.

Engineering support from the aircraft manufacturer is 
required for repair techniques and methods that are not 
described in the aircraft maintenance manual or SRM. 

FAA Form 337, Major Repair and Alteration, must be 
completed for repairs to the following parts of an airframe and 
repairs of the following types involving the strengthening, 
reinforcing, splicing, and manufacturing of primary structural 
members or their replacement, when replacement is by 
fabrication, such as riveting or welding. [Figure 4-173]

• Box beams

• Monocoque  or  semimonocoque  wings  or 
control surfaces

• Wing stringers or chord members

• Spars

• Spar flanges

• Members of truss-type beams

• Thin sheet webs of beams

• Keel and chine members of boat hulls or floats

• Corrugated sheet compression members that act as 
flange material of wings or tail surfaces

• Wing main ribs and compression members

• Wing or tail surface brace struts, fuselage longerons

• Members of the side truss, horizontal truss, 
or bulkheads

• Main seat support braces and brackets

• Landing gear brace struts

• Repairs involving the substitution of material

• Repair of damaged areas in metal or plywood stressed 
covering exceeding six inches in any direction

• Repair of portions of skin sheets by making 
additional seams

• Splicing of thin sheets

• Repair of three or more adjacent wing or control 
surface ribs or the leading edge of wings and control 
surfaces between such adjacent ribs

For major repairs made in accordance with a manual or 
specifications acceptable to the Administrator, a certificated 
repair station may use the customer’s work order upon which 
the repair is recorded in place of the FAA Form 337.

Repair of Stressed Skin Structure 
In aircraft construction, stressed skin is a form of construction 
in which the external covering (skin) of an aircraft carries 
part or all of the main loads. Stressed skin is made from high 
strength rolled aluminum sheets. Stressed skin carries a large 
portion of the load imposed upon an aircraft structure. Various 
specific skin areas are classified as highly critical, semicritical, 


4-95

FAA Form 337 (10/06) 





MAJOR REPAIR AND ALTERATION 
US Department 
of Transportation (Airframe, Powerplant, Propeller, or Appliance) 
Federal Aviation 
Administration 

OMB No. 2120-0020 
Exp: 5/31/2018 

Electronic Tracking Number 

For FAA Use Only 



INSTRUCTIONS: Print or type all entries.  See Title 14 CFR §43.9, Part 43 Appendix B, and AC 43.9-1 (or subsequent revision thereof) for 
instructions and disposition of this form.  This report is required by law (49 U.S.C. §44701).  Failure to report can result in a civil penalty for each 
such violation.  (49 U.S.C. §46301(a)) 

 
 
1. Aircraft 

Nationality and Registration Mark Serial No. 

Make Model Series 

 
 
2. Owner 

Name (As shown on registration certificate) Address (As shown on registration certificate) 
Address 

City State 
 
Zip Country 

3. For FAA Use Only 
 

4. Type 5. Unit Identification 

Repair Alteration Unit Make Model Serial No. 

   AIRFRAME  (As described in Item 1 above)  

   POWERPLANT    

   PROPELLER    

   
 
APPLIANCE 

Type   

Manufacturer 

6. Conformity Statement 
A. Agency's Name and Address B. Kind of Agency 
Name 

Address      

City State     

Zip Country       

 U. S. Certificated Mechanic  Manufacturer 
 Foreign Certificated Mechanic C. Certificate No. 
 Certificated Repair Station  
 Certificated Maintenance Organization 

D.  I certify that the repair and/or alteration made to the unit(s) identified in item 5 above and described on the reverse or attachments hereto 
have been made in accordance with the requirements of Part 43 of the U.S. Federal Aviation Regulations and that the information 
furnished herein is true and correct to the best of my knowledge. 

Extended range fuel 
per 14 CFR Part 43 
App. B 

Signature/Date of Authorized Individual 

7. Approval for Return to Service 
Pursuant  to  the  authority  given  persons  specified  below,  the  unit  identified  in  item  5  was  inspected  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the 
Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and is Approved Rejected 

 
 
BY 

 FAA Flt. Standards 
Inspector 

  Manufacturer  
 

Maintenance Organization  Persons Approved by Canadian Department of Transport 
  FAA Designee  

 
Repair Station  

 
Inspection Authorization 

Other (Specify) 

Certificate or 
Designation No. 

Signature/Date of Authorized Individual 

Figure 4-173. FAA Form 337, Major Repair and Alteration (Airframe, Powerplant, Propeller, or Appliance).


4-96

FAA Form 337 (10/06) 

NOTICE 

Weight and balance or operating limitation changes shall be entered in the appropriate aircraft record.  An alteration must be
compatible with all previous alterations to assure continued conformity with the applicable airworthiness requirements.

8. Description of Work Accomplished
(If more space is required, attach additional sheets. Identify with aircraft nationality and registration mark and date work completed.)

Nationality and Registration Mark  Date 

Additional Sheets Are Attached 

Figure 4-173. FAA Form 337, Major Repair and Alteration (Airframe, Powerplant, Propeller, or Appliance) continued.


4-97

Original damage

Skin

Stop holes—drill 3/32" diameter
holes in each sharp  corner or
crack or break and clean up
edges

Rivets—material thickness 
of 0.032 inch or less. Use 
1/8" rivets—material thickness
greater than 0.032", use 5/32" 
rivets.

Space rivets aproximately
1" apart in staggered 
rows 1/2" apart.

Maintain minimum edge
distance of 1" when skin
thickness is 0.032" or less
and 1/8" when  skin thickness 
is more than 0.032".

Minimum edge distance
using 1/8" rivets is 1/4" and
using 5/32" rivets is 5/16".

Reinforcement material—ALCLAD 2024-T3
same gauge or one gauge heavier

Figure 4-174. Lap or scab patch (crack).

Neutral axis
5°

Rivet hole
Edge distance

T

1/2 T

45°

Figure 4-175. Lap patch edge preparation.

or noncritical. To determine specific repair requirements for 
these areas, refer to the applicable aircraft maintenance manual. 

Minor damage to the outside skin of the aircraft can be 
repaired by applying a patch to the inside of the damaged 
sheet. A filler plug must be installed in the hole made by 
the removal of the damaged skin area. It plugs the hole and 
forms a smooth outside surface necessary for aerodynamic 
smoothness of the aircraft. The size and shape of the patch 
is determined in general by the number of rivets required in 
the repair. If not otherwise specified, calculate the required 
number of rivets by using the rivet formula. Make the patch 
plate of the same material as the original skin and of the same 
thickness or of the next greater thickness.

Patches 
Skin patches may be classified as two types:

• Lap or scab patch

• Flush patch

Lap or Scab Patch

The lap or scab type of patch is an external patch where 
the edges of the patch and the skin overlap each other. The 
overlapping portion of the patch is riveted to the skin. Lap 
patches may be used in most areas where aerodynamic 
smoothness is not important. Figure 4-174 shows a typical 
patch for a crack and or for a hole.

When repairing cracks or small holes with a lap or scab patch, 
the damage must be cleaned and smoothed. In repairing 
cracks, a small hole must be drilled in each end and sharp 
bend of the crack before applying the patch. These holes 
relieve the stress at these points and prevent the crack from 
spreading. The patch must be large enough to install the 
required number of rivets. It may be cut circular, square, 
or rectangular. If it is cut square or rectangular, the corners 
are rounded to a radius no smaller than 1⁄4-inch. The edges 
must be chamfered to an angle of 45° for 1⁄2 the thickness 
of the material, and bent down 5° over the edge distance 
to seal the edges. This reduces the chance that the repair is 
affected by the airflow over it. These dimensions are shown 
in Figure 4-175.

Flush Patch

A flush patch is a filler patch that is flush to the skin when 
applied it is supported by and riveted to a reinforcement 
plate which is, in turn, riveted to the inside of the skin. 
Figure 4-176 shows a typical flush patch repair. The doubler 
is inserted through the opening and rotated until it slides in 
place under the skin. The filler must be of the same gauge 
and material as the original skin. The doubler should be of 
material one gauge heavier than the skin.

Open and Closed Skin Area Repair 

The factors that determine the methods to be used in 
skin repair are accessibility to the damaged area and the 
instructions found in the aircraft maintenance manual. The 
skin on most areas of an aircraft is inaccessible for making 
the repair from the inside and is known as closed skin. Skin 
that is accessible from both sides is called open skin. 


4-98

Damage

Doubler

Filler

Doubler riveted in place

Filler riveted in place

Damaged area cut 
to a smooth rectangle 
with corner radil

Insertion

Doubler

Skin

Insertion

Patch

Skin

SkinSkin

Doubler

1/4 inch deep dent

Insertion patch method

Cover patch method

P

E

E

Figure 4-176. Typical flush patch repair. 

Figure 4-177. Repair patch for a non-pressurized area.

Usually, repairs to open skin can be made in the conventional 
manner using standard rivets, but in repairing closed skin, 
some type of special fastener must be used. The exact type 
to be used depends on the type of repair being made and the 
recommendations of the aircraft manufacturer.

Design of a Patch for a Non-pressurized Area

Damage to the aircraft skin in a non-pressurized area 
can be repaired by a flush patch if a smooth skin surface 
is required or by an external patch in noncritical areas. 
[Figure 4-177] The first step is to remove the damage. Cut 

the damage to a round, oval, or rectangular shape. Round 
all corners of a rectangular patch to a minimum radius of 
0.5-inch. The minimum edge distance used is 2 times the 
diameter and the rivet spacing is typically between 4-6 times 
the diameter. The size of the doubler depends on the edge 
distance and rivet spacing. The doubler material is of the same 
material as the damaged skin, but of one thickness greater 
than the damaged skin. The size of the doubler depends on 
the edge distance and rivet spacing. The insert is made of 
the same material and thickness as the damaged skin. The 
size and type of rivets should be the same as rivets used for 
similar joints on the aircraft. The SRM indicates what size 
and type of rivets to use.

Typical Repairs for Aircraft Structures 
This section describes typical repairs of the major structural 
parts of an airplane. When repairing a damaged component 
or part, consult the applicable section of the manufacturer’s 


4-99

SRM for the aircraft. Normally, a similar repair is illustrated, 
and the types of material, rivets, and rivet spacing and the 
methods and procedures to be used are listed. Any additional 
knowledge needed to make a repair is also detailed. If the 
necessary information is not found in the SRM, attempt to 
find a similar repair or assembly installed by the manufacturer 
of the aircraft.

Floats
To maintain the float in an airworthy condition, periodic and 
frequent inspections should be made because of the rapidity 
of corrosion on metal parts, particularly when the aircraft is 
operated in salt water. Inspection of floats and hulls involves 
examination for damage due to corrosion, collision with 
other objects, hard landings, and other conditions that may 
lead to failure. 

NOTE: Blind rivets should not be used on floats or amphibian 
hulls below the water line.

Sheet-metal floats should be repaired using approved 
practices; however, the seams between sections of sheet 
metal should be waterproofed with suitable fabric and sealing 
compound. A float that has undergone hull repairs should be 
tested by filling it with water and allowing it to stand for at 
least 24 hours to see if any leaks develop. [Figure 4-178]

Corrugated Skin Repair
Some of the flight controls of smaller general aviation aircraft 
have beads in their skin panels. The beads give some stiffness 
to the thin skin panels. The beads for the repair patch can be 
formed with a rotary former or press brake. [Figure 4-179]

Replacement of a Panel
Damage to metal aircraft skin that exceeds repairable limits 
requires replacement of the entire panel. [Figure 4-180] A 
panel must also be replaced when there are too many previous 
repairs in a given section or area.

In aircraft construction, a panel is any single sheet of metal 
covering. A panel section is the part of a panel between 
adjacent stringers and bulk heads. Where a section of skin 
is damaged to such an extent that it is impossible to install 
a standard skin repair, a special type of repair is necessary. 
The particular type of repair required depends on whether the 
damage is repairable outside the member, inside the member, 
or to the edges of the panel.

Outside the Member 
For damage that, after being trimmed, has 81⁄2 rivet diameters or 
more of material, extend the patch to include the manufacturer’s 
row of rivets and add an extra row inside the members.

Inside the Member
For damage that, after being trimmed, has less than 81⁄2 
manufacturer’s rivet diameters of material inside the 
members, use a patch that extends over the members and an 
extra row of rivets along the outside of the members. 

Edges of the Panel 
For damage that extends to the edge of a panel, use 
only one row of rivets along the panel edge, unless the 
manufacturer used more than one row. The repair procedure 
for the other edges of the damage follows the previously 
explained methods.

The procedures for making all three types of panel repairs 
are similar. Trim out the damaged portion to the allowances 
mentioned in the preceding paragraphs. For relief of stresses 
at the corners of the trim-out, round them to a minimum 
radius of ½-inch. Lay out the new rivet row with a transverse 
pitch of approximately five rivet diameters and stagger the 
rivets with those put in by the manufacturer. Cut the patch 
plate from material of the same thickness as the original or 
the next greater thickness, allowing an edge distance of 21⁄2 
rivet diameters. At the corners, strike arcs having the radius 
equal to the edge distance. 

Chamfer the edges of the patch plate for a 45° angle and form 
the plate to fit the contour of the original structure. Turn the 
edges downward slightly so that the edges fit closely. Place 
the patch plate in its correct position, drill one rivet hole, and 
temporarily fasten the plate in place with a fastener. Using a 
hole finder, locate the position of a second hole, drill it, and 
insert a second fastener. Then, from the back side and through 
the original holes, locate and drill the remaining holes. 
Remove the burrs from the rivet holes and apply corrosion 
protective material to the contacting surfaces before riveting 
the patch into place.

Repair of Lightning Holes
As discussed earlier, lightning holes are cut in rib sections, 
fuselage frames, and other structural parts to reduce the 
weight of the part. The holes are flanged to make the web 
stiffer. Cracks can develop around flanged lightning holes, 
and these cracks need to be repaired with a repair plate. 
The damaged area (crack) needs to be stop drilled or the 
damage must be removed. The repair plate is made of the 
same material and thickness as the damaged part. Rivets are 
the same as in surrounding structure and the minimum edge 
distance is 2 times the diameter and spacing is between four 
to six times the diameter. Figure 4-181 illustrates a typical 
lightning hole repair.


4-100

Replace skin Splice in new portion Replace skin

Replace skeg

Detail A

Repair to step

Repair to step station

Repairs to keelson

Splice

Station 5Splice

Shims

Extrusion angle stiffener

A

Figure 4-178. Float repair. 


4-101

Skin

Use MS20470AD4 or MS20600 self-plugging rivets or equivalent

0.25" edge distance

Patch 0.016" AlcladTM 2024-T4

0.75˝ rivet spacing

0.25" radius

Cut out damaged area

Figure 4-179. Beaded skin repair on corrugated surfaces. 

Repairs to a Pressurized Area
The skin of aircraft that are pressurized during flight is highly 
stressed. The pressurization cycles apply loads to the skin, 
and the repairs to this type of structure requires more rivets 
than a repair to a nonpressurized skin. [Figure 4-182]

1. Remove the damaged skin section.

2. Radius all corners to 0.5-inch.

3. Fabricate a doubler of the same type of material as, 
but of one size greater thickness than, the skin. The 
size of the doubler depends on the number of rows, 
edge distance, and rivets spacing.

4. Fabricate an insert of the same material and same 
thickness as the damaged skin. The skin to insert 
clearance is typically 0.015-inch to 0.035-inch.

5. Drill the holes through the doubler, insertion, and 
original skin.

6. Spread a thin layer of sealant on the doubler and secure 
the doubler to the skin with Clecos.

7. Use the same type of fastener as in the surrounding 
area, and install the doubler to the skin and the 
insertion to the doubler. Dip all fasteners in the sealant 
before installation.


4-102

Repair seam same as strongest
parallel adjacent seam.

Repair seam same as strongest
parallel adjacent seam. Use original

holes and add as needed. Additional Rivets
Trimmed hole

radiused corners

3/16" 5/32" 1/8"

Figure 4-180. Replacement of an entire panel.

Stringer Repair
The fuselage stringers extend from the nose of the aircraft 
to the tail, and the wing stringers extend from the fuselage 
to the wing tip. Surface control stringers usually extend the
length of the control surface. The skin of the fuselage, wing, 
or control surface is riveted to stringers. 

Stringers may be damaged by vibration, corrosion, or 
collision. Because stringers are made in many different 
shapes, repair procedures differ. The repair may require the 
use of preformed or extruded repair material, or it may require 
material formed by the airframe technician. Some repairs may 
need both kinds of repair material. When repairing a stringer, 
first determine the extent of the damage and remove the rivets 
from the surrounding area. [Figure 4-183] Then, remove the 
damaged area by using a hacksaw, keyhole saw, drill, or file. 
In most cases, a stringer repair requires the use of insert and 
splice angle. When locating the splice angle on the stringer 
during repair, be sure to consult the applicable structural 
repair manual for the repair piece’s position. Some stringers 
are repaired by placing the splice angle on the inside, whereas 
others are repaired by placing it on the outside.

Extrusions and preformed materials are commonly used to 
repair angles and insertions or fillers. If repair angles and 
fillers must be formed from flat sheet stock, use the brake. 
It may be necessary to use bend allowance and sight lines 
when making the layout and bends for these formed parts. 
For repairs to curved stringers, make the repair parts so that 
they fit the original contour.

Figure 4-184 shows a stringer repair by patching. This repair 
is permissible when the damage does not exceed two-thirds 
of the width of one leg and is not more than 12 inches long. 
Damage exceeding these limits can be repaired by one of the 
following methods.

Figure 4-185 illustrates repair by insertion where damage 
exceeds two-thirds of the width of one leg and after a portion 
of the stringer is removed. Figure 4-186 shows repair by 
insertion when the damage affects only one stringer and 
exceeds 12 inches in length. Figure 4-187 illustrates repair 
by an insertion when damage affects more than one stringer.
 


4-103

A

A
View       -A A

Repair for crack on lightening hole flangeStop drill ends of crack use #40 drill

Patch is same material and thickness as web

Repair for crack between lightening holes

Figure 4-181. Repair of lightening holes. 

Former or Bulkhead Repair
Bulkheads are the oval-shaped members of the fuselage 
that give form to and maintain the shape of the structure. 
Bulkheads or formers are often called forming rings, 
body frames, circumferential rings, belt frames, and other 
similar names. They are designed to carry concentrated 
stressed loads.

There are various types of bulkheads. The most common type 
is a curved channel formed from sheet stock with stiffeners 
added. Others have a web made from sheet stock with 
extruded angles riveted in place as stiffeners and flanges. 
Most of these members are made from aluminum alloy. 
Corrosion-resistant steel formers are used in areas that are 
exposed to high temperatures.

Bulkhead damages are classified in the same manner as 
other damages. Specifications for each type of damage are 
established by the manufacturer and specific information is 

given in the maintenance manual or SRM for the aircraft. 
Bulkheads are identified with station numbers that are very 
helpful in locating repair information. Figure 4-188 is an 
example of a typical repair for a former, frame section, or 
bulkhead repair.

1. Stop drill the crack ends with a No. 40 size drill.

2. Fabricate a doubler of the same material but one size 
thicker than the part being repaired. The doubler 
should be of a size large enough to accommodate 1⁄8-
inch rivet holes spaced one inch apart, with a minimum 
edge distance of 0.30-inch and 0.50-inch spacing 
between staggered rows. [Figure 4-189]

3. Attach the doubler to the part with clamps and 
drill holes.

4. Install rivets.


4-104

Insertion

Doubler

Skin

Insertion

SkinDoubler

P

E

Sealer

Removed damage

0.35"

0.35"

0.50"

       -A A

0.58"

0.58"

0.10" rad.

A

A

0.064" 245-T4 AlcladTM strip

Use AN470 or AN456 AD3 rivets

Stringer CS-14 and CS-15

0.04" 245-T4 AlcladTM

If damage has been cut away from center section of stringer length, 
both ends of new portion must be attached as shown below.

3.3
5"

3.3
5"

0.9
0"

0.9
0"

0.4
0"

0.90
"

0.90
" 0.20

"

Original structure

Repair parts

Repair parts in 
cross section

Figure 4-182. Pressurized skin repair. 

Figure 4-183. Stringer repair.

Most repairs to bulkheads are made from flat sheet stock if 
spare parts are not available. When fabricating the repair from 
flat sheet, remember the substitute material must provide 
cross-sectional tensile, compressive, shear, and bearing 
strength equal to the original material. Never substitute 
material that is thinner or has a cross-sectional area less than 
the original material. Curved repair parts made from flat sheet 
must be in the “0” condition before forming, and then must 
be heat treated before installation.

Longeron Repair
Generally, longerons are comparatively heavy members 
that serve approximately the same function as stringers. 
Consequently, longeron repair is similar to stringer repair. 
Because the longeron is a heavy member and more strength 
is needed than with a stringer, heavy rivets are used in the 
repair. Sometimes bolts are used to install a longeron repair, 
due to the need for greater accuracy, they are not as suitable 
as rivets. Also, bolts require more time for installation.

If the longeron consists of a formed section and an extruded 
angle section, consider each section separately. A longeron 
repair is similar to a stringer repair, but keep the rivet pitch 
between 4 and 6 rivet diameters. If bolts are used, drill the 
bolt holes for a light drive fit.

Spar Repair
The spar is the main supporting member of the wing. Other 
components may also have supporting members called spars 
that serve the same function as the spar does in the wing. 
Think of spars as the hub, or base, of the section in which they 
are located, even though they are not in the center. The spar 
is usually the first member located during the construction of 
the section, and the other components are fastened directly 
or indirectly to it. Because of the load the spar carries, it is 
very important that particular care be taken when repairing 
this member to ensure the original strength of the structure 
is not impaired. The spar is constructed so that two general 
classes of repairs, web repairs and cap strip repairs, are 
usually necessary.


4-105

Damage area

Filler

Reinforcement

Damaged area cut out
smooth with corner radil

Assembled repair

Damage area

Filler

Reinforcement

Damaged area
cut out smooth

Assembled repair

Figure 4-184. Stringer repair by patching. 

Figure 4-185. Stringer repair by insertion when damage exceeds 
two-thirds of one leg in width.

Figures 4-189 and 4-190 are examples of typical spar repairs. 
The damage to the spar web can be repaired with a round or 
rectangular doubler. Damage smaller than 1-inch is typically 
repaired with a round doubler and larger damage is repaired 
with a rectangular doubler. 

1. Remove the damage and radius all corners to 0.5-inch.

2. Fabricate doubler; use same material and thickness. 
The doubler size depends on edge distance (minimum 
of 2D) and rivet spacing (4-6D).

3. Drill through the doubler and the original skin and 
secure doubler with Clecos.

4. Install rivets.

Rib and Web Repair
Web repairs can be classified into two types:

1. Those made to web sections considered critical, such 
as those in the wing ribs.

2. Those considered less critical, such as those in 
elevators, rudders, flaps, and the like.

Web sections must be repaired in such a way that the original 
strength of the member is restored. In the construction of 
a member using a web, the web member is usually a light 
gauge aluminum alloy sheet forming the principal depth of 
the member. The web is bounded by heavy aluminum alloy 
extrusions known as cap strips. These extrusions carry the 
loads caused by bending and also provide a foundation for 
attaching the skin. The web may be stiffened by stamped 
beads, formed angles, or extruded sections riveted at regular 
intervals along the web.

The stamped beads are a part of the web itself and are stamped 
in when the web is made. Stiffeners help to withstand the 
compressive loads exerted upon the critically stressed web 
members. Often, ribs are formed by stamping the entire piece 
from sheet stock. That is, the rib lacks a cap strip, but does 
have a flange around the entire piece, plus lightning holes in 
the web of the rib. Ribs may be formed with stamped beads 
for stiffeners, or they may have extruded angles riveted on 
the web for stiffeners.


4-106

Damage area

Insertion

Splice angles

Damaged area cut out smooth

Assembled repair

Damage area

Reinforcements

Rib repaired

Damaged skin cut 
back to smooth contour 
with corner radii

Assembled repair

Stringer insertion

Damaged area cut 
    back so joints will  
       be staggered

Section A-A

Skin

Rib

Figure 4-187. Stringer repair by insertion when damage affects 
more than one stringer. 

Figure 4-186. Stringer repair by insertion when damage affects 
only one stringer. 

Most damages involve two or more members, but only one 
member may be damaged and need repairing. Generally, 
if the web is damaged, cleaning out the damaged area and 
installing a patch plate are all that is required.

The patch plate should be of sufficient size to ensure room for 
at least two rows of rivets around the perimeter of the damage 
that includes proper edge distance, pitch, and transverse pitch 
for the rivets. The patch plate should be of material having the 
same thickness and composition as the original member. If 
any forming is necessary when making the patch plate, such 
as fitting the contour of a lightning hole, use material in the 
“0” condition and then heat treat it after forming. 

Damage to ribs and webs, that require a repair larger than a 
simple plate, probably needs a patch plate, splice plates, or 
angles and an insertion. [Figure 4-191]

Leading Edge Repair
The leading edge is the front section of a wing, stabilizer, or 
other airfoil. The purpose of the leading edge is to streamline 
the forward section of the wings or control surfaces to 

ensure effective airflow. The space within the leading edge 
is sometimes used to store fuel. This space may also house 
extra equipment, such as landing lights, plumbing lines, or 
thermal anti-icing systems.

The construction of the leading edge section varies with the 
type of aircraft. Generally, it consists of cap strips, nose ribs, 
stringers, and skin. The cap strips are the main lengthwise 


4-107

Crack

Stop drill #40 drill hole

Stop drill #40 drill hole

Crack

Doubler

Doubler

Bulkhead

Radius to rest in bulkhead

Bulkhead

1.5" minimum

1.5" minimum

OR

Radius to rest in bulkhead

Figure 4-188. Bulkhead repair. 

extrusions, and they stiffen the leading edges and furnish a 
base for the nose ribs and skin. They also fasten the leading 
edge to the front spar.

The nose ribs are stamped from aluminum alloy sheet or 
machined parts. These ribs are U-shaped and may have 
their web sections stiffened. Regardless of their design, their 
purpose is to give contour to the leading edge. Stiffeners 
are used to stiffen the leading edge and supply a base for 
fastening the nose skin. When fastening the nose skin, use 
only flush rivets.

Leading edges constructed with thermal anti-icing systems 
consist of two layers of skin separated by a thin air space. The 
inner skin, sometimes corrugated for strength, is perforated 
to conduct the hot air to the nose skin for anti-icing purposes.
Damage can be caused by contact with other objects, namely, 

pebbles, birds, and hail. However, the major cause of damage 
is carelessness while the aircraft is on the ground.

A damaged leading edge usually involves several structural 
parts. FOD probably involves the nose skin, nose ribs, 
stringers, and possibly the cap strip. Damage involving all 
of these members necessitates installing an access door to 
make the repair possible. First, the damaged area has to be 
removed and repair procedures established. The repair needs 
insertions and splice pieces. If the damage is serious enough, 
it may require repair of the cap strip and stringer, a new nose 
rib, and a skin panel. When repairing a leading edge, follow 
the procedures prescribed in the appropriate repair manual 
for this type of repair. [Figure 4-192] Repairs to leading 
edges are more difficult to accomplish than repairs to flat 
and straight structures because the repair parts need to be 
formed to fit the existing structure.
 
Trailing Edge Repair
A trailing edge is the rearmost part of an airfoil found on 
the wings, ailerons, rudders, elevators, and stabilizers. It is  
usually a metal strip that forms the shape of the edge by tying 
the ends of a rib section together and joining the upper and 
lower skins. Trailing edges are not structural members, but 
they are considered to be highly stressed in all cases.

Damage to a trailing edge may be limited to one point or 
extended over the entire length between two or more rib 
sections. Besides damage resulting from collision and 
careless handling, corrosion damage is often present. Trailing 
edges are particularly subject to corrosion because moisture 
collects or is trapped in them.

Thoroughly inspect the damaged area before starting repairs, 
and determine the extent of damage, the type of repair 
required, and the manner in which the repair should be 
performed. When making trailing edge repairs, remember 
that the repaired area must have the same contour and be 
made of material with the same composition and temper as 
the original section. The repair must also be made to retain 
the design characteristics of the airfoil. [Figure 4-193]

Specialized Repairs
Figures 4-194 through 4-198 are examples of repairs for 
various structural members. Specific dimensions are not 
included since the illustrations are intended to present the 
basic design philosophy of general repairs rather than be 
used as repair guidelines for actual structures. Remember to 
consult the SRM for specific aircraft to obtain the maximum 
allowable damage that may be repaired and the suggested 
method for accomplishing the repair.


4-108

A

A

2

1

3

Spar chord

Web

Fillet seal (typical) Seal heads (typical)Make a laying surface seal refer to SRM 51-20-05

Web

3

0.050
0.070 Gap (typical)

2
1

2D
 m

inu
mu

m 
(ty

pic
al)

Damage cutout 0.50R minimum all corners

AFT

B

B

Note: Use this repair at the
  inboard end of the spar
  when the damage is near
  the upper or lower chord.

Figure 4-189. Wing spar repair. 

Inspection Openings
If it is permitted by the applicable aircraft maintenance 
manual, installation of a flush access door for inspection 
purposes sometimes makes it easier to repair the internal 
structure as well as damage to the skin in certain areas. This 
installation consists of a doubler and a stressed cover plate. 
A single row of nut plates is riveted to the doubler, and the 
doubler is riveted to the skin with two staggered rows of 
rivets. [Figure 4-199] The cover plate is then attached to the 
doubler with machine screws.


4-109

Same material and thickness

Upper flange

Spar web

Lower flange

PatchPatch

Damage

Case A Case B

Rib

Reinforcement plate

Original damaged web area

Clean holes smooth

Pick up rivets along flange—
add reinforcing rivets spaced 
3/4" as shown, maintaining 
21/2 times rivet diameter for 
proper edge

Reinforcement 
material—same as 
original and of 
same gauge or one 
gauge heavier.

If web stiffener is within 1/2" 
of hole and is not damaged.
Drill out stiffener rivets. 
After repair is made, rivet 
stiffener at original location. 
Add new stiffener if stiffener 
is damaged.

Figure 4-190. Wing spar repair. 

Figure 4-191. Wing rib repair.


4-110

0.63" to 0.94" spacing
two evenly staggered
rows at 0.55" minimum
pitch

Nose rib

Repair plate

0.50 R minimum (typical)Rib access hole in nose beam

Nose beam

Doubler

0.35" minimum

edge margin

0.38"

       -A A

2.80" minimum 2.80" minimum3.0" minimum3.0" minimum

11.60" min.

0.25"
4.8"

0.06" R

A

A
Use AN470 or AN456 AD3 or equivalent
Cherry self-plugging CR-163 rivets

Dam
age

d po
rtion



cut-
awa

y 6.0
0" m

axim
um

Original structure

Repair parts

Repair parts in cross section

Patch to be 0.016" 24S-T4 ALCLAD

Filler strip 0.016" 24S-T4 ALCLAD

Replacement section of trailing edge strip
0.032" 24ST4 ALCLAD

0.60" minimum

1.2
5"

0.8"

15°

0.60" minimum

0.70
"
0.70

"

0.70
"
0.70

"

0.40
"

0.40
"

5.0
0" 

ma
xim

um

0.9
"

0.9
"

0.9
"

0.9
"

Bottom skin

Figure 4-192. Leading edge repair.

Figure 4-193. Trailing edge repair. 


4-111

Figure 4-194. C-channel repair.

Remaining portions of existing member

Trim
me

d d
am

age

Trim
me

d d
am

age

Repair element

Repair element

Continuous line of
fasteners at uniform
spacing required full
length to join repair
element

Existing member

Continuous line of
fasteners at uniform
spacing required full
length or repair
element

The required quantity of fasteners used to install the repair element is equal on both sides of the trimmed damage.


4-112

C

C

C

C

C

C

Support or skin Support or skinSupport or skin

Doubler Doubler Doubler

Support or skin Support or skinSupport or skin

Insertion

Doubler

Z Section

P

E

P

Figure 4-195. Primary Z-section repair.


4-113

Figure 4-196. U-channel repair. 

E

C

Existing channels

Angles

Skin

Angles

Insertion

P


4-114

Patch—thickness of channel

Channel

Trimmed area

Drill No. 30 (0.128")

Rivets

Finished Repair

Patch angle—thickness of channel

ChannelTrimmed area

Patch angle—thickness of channel

Drill No. 30 (0.128") 1/2" spacing (approximate)
Finished Repair

Rivets

Figure 4-197. Channel repair by patching.

Figure 4-198. Channel repair by insertion.


4-115

Figure 4-199. Inspection hole.

1/4
" m

inim
um

1" 
ma

xim
um

7"

Skin

Reinforcement (doubler) plate

Access hole cover—thickness of skin

Reinforcement material—AlcladTM 2024-T3 
same gauge or one gauge heavier

Rivets—material thickness of 0.040" 
or less, use 1/8" rivets
Rivets—material thickness greater than 
0.040" use 5/32" rivets

Access hole—clean, smooth, and round; length is minimum of 7" to
match the reinforcement doubler that is being installed.

Plate nut


4-116

