
6-1

Chapter 6

Aircraft Wood 
and Structural Repair
Aircraft Wood and Structural Repair
Wood was among the first materials used to construct aircraft. 
Most of the airplanes built during World War I (WWI) were 
constructed of wood frames with fabric coverings. Wood 
was the material of choice for aircraft construction into the 
1930s. Part of the reason was the slow development of strong, 
lightweight, metal aircraft structures and the lack of suitable 
corrosion-resistant materials for all-metal aircraft. 


6-2

Figure 6-1. British DeHavilland Mosquito bomber.

Figure 6-2. Hughes Flying Boat, H-4 Hercules named the Spruce 
Goose.

In the late 1930s, the British airplane company DeHavilland 
designed and developed a bomber named the Mosquito. 
Well into the late 1940s, DeHavilland produced more than 
7,700 airplanes made of spruce, birch plywood, and balsa 
wood. [Figure 6-1]

During the early part of WWII, the U.S. government put 
out a contract to build three flying boats. Hughes Aircraft 
ultimately won the contract with the mandate to use only 
materials not critical to the war, such as aluminum and steel. 
Hughes designed the aircraft to be constructed out of wood.

After many delays and loss of government funding, Howard 
Hughes continued construction, using his own money and 
completing one aircraft. On November 2, 1947, during taxi 
tests in the harbor at Long Beach, California, Hughes piloted 
the Spruce Goose for over a mile at an altitude of 70 feet, 
proving it could fly. 

This was the largest seaplane and the largest wooden aircraft 
ever constructed. Its empty weight was 300,000 pounds with 
a maximum takeoff weight of 400,000 pounds. The entire 
airframe, surface structures, and flaps were composed of 
laminated wood with fabric covered primary control surfaces. 
It was powered by eight Pratt & Whitney R-4360 radial 
engines, each producing 3,000 horsepower. [Figure 6-2]

As aircraft design and manufacturing evolved, the 
development of lightweight metals and the demand for 
increased production moved the industry away from aircraft 
constructed entirely of wood. Some general aviation aircraft 
were produced with wood spars and wings, but today only a 
limited number of wood aircraft are produced. Most of those 
are built by their owners for education or recreation and not 
for production.  

Quite a number of airplanes in which wood was used as 
the primary structural material still exist and are operating, 
including certificated aircraft that were constructed during 
the 1930s and later. With the proper maintenance and 
repair procedures, these older aircraft can be maintained 
in an airworthy condition and kept operational for many 
years.  

Wood Aircraft Construction and Repairs
The information presented in this chapter is general in 
nature and should not be regarded as a substitute for 
specific instructions contained in the aircraft manufacturer’s 
maintenance and repair manuals. Methods of construction 
vary greatly with different types of aircraft, as do the various 
repair and maintenance procedures required to keep them 
airworthy. 

When specific manufacturer’s manuals and instructions are 
not available, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
Advisory Circular (AC) 43.13-1, Acceptable Methods, 
Techniques, and Practices—Aircraft Inspection and Repair, 
can be used as reference for inspections and repairs. The AC 
details in the first paragraph, Purpose, the criteria necessary 
for its use. In part, it stipulates that the use of the AC is 
acceptable to the FAA for the inspection and minor repair 
of nonpressurized areas of civil aircraft. 

It also specifies that the repairs identified in the AC may 
also be used as a basis for FAA approval of major repairs 
when listed in block 8 of FAA Form 337, Major Repair and 
Alteration, when: 

1. The user has determined that it is appropriate to the 
product being repaired;

2.  It is directly applicable to the repair being made; and 

3.  It is not contrary to manufacturer’s data. 

Certificated mechanics that have the experience of working 
on wooden aircraft are becoming rare. Title 14 of the Code 
of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 65 states in part that a 
certificated mechanic may not perform any work for which 
he or she is rated unless he or she has performed the work 
concerned at an earlier date. This means that if an individual 
does not have the previous aviation woodworking experience 


6-3

Ply skins

Ply skins

Figure 6-3. Cross sectional view of a stressed skin structure.

Figure 6-4. A distorted single plywood structure.

performing the repair on an aircraft, regulation requires a 
certificated and appropriately rated mechanic or repairman 
who has had previous experience in the operation concerned 
to supervise that person. 

The ability to inspect wood structures and recognize defects 
(dry rot, compression failures, etc.) can be learned through 
experience and instruction from knowledgeable certificated 
mechanics and appropriately qualified technical instructors. 

Inspection of Wood Structures  
To properly inspect an aircraft constructed or comprised 
of wood components, the aircraft must be dry. It should be 
placed in a dry, well-ventilated hangar with all inspection 
covers, access panels, and removable fairings opened and 
removed. This allows interior sections and compartments to 
thoroughly dry. Wet, or even damp, wood causes swelling 
and makes it difficult to make a proper determination of the 
condition of the glue joints. 

If there is any doubt that the wood is dry, a moisture meter 
should be utilized to verify the percentage of moisture in 
the structure. Nondestructive meters are available that check 
moisture without making holes in the surface. The ideal range 
is 8–12 percent, with any reading over 20 percent providing 
an environment for the growth of fungus in the wood.  

External and Internal Inspection
The inspection should begin with an examination of the 
external surface of the aircraft. This provides a general 
assessment of the overall condition of the wood and structure. 
The wings, fuselage, and empennage should be inspected for 
undulation, warping, or any other disparity from the original 
shape. Where the wings, fuselage, or empennage structure 
and skins form stressed structures, no departure from the 
original contour or shape is permissible. [Figure 6-3]  
         
Where light structures using single plywood covering are 
concerned, some slight sectional undulation or bulging 
between panels may be permissible if the wood and glue 
are sound. However, where such conditions exist, a careful 
check must be made of the attachment of the plywood to its 
supporting structure. A typical example of a distorted single 
plywood structure is illustrated in Figure 6-4.

The contours and alignment of leading and trailing edges are 
of particular importance. A careful check should be made 
for any deviation from the original shape. Any distortion 
of these light plywood and spruce structures is indicative 
of deterioration, and a detailed internal inspection has to be 
made for security of these parts to the main wing structure. 
If deterioration is found in these components, the main wing 
structure may also be affected.


6-4

Plain sawed (tangential cut)

Quarter sawed (radial cut)

Figure 6-5. Effects of shrinkage on the various shapes during drying 
from the green condition.

Splits in the fabric covering on plywood surfaces must be 
investigated to ascertain whether the plywood skin beneath 
is serviceable. In all cases, remove the fabric and inspect the 
plywood, since it is common for a split in the plywood skin 
to initiate a similar defect in the protective fabric covering.
 
Although a preliminary inspection of the external structure 
can be useful in assessing the general condition of the aircraft, 
note that wood and glue deterioration can often take place 
inside a structure without any external indications. Where 
moisture can enter a structure, it seeks the lowest point, where 
it stagnates and promotes rapid deterioration. A musty or 
moldy odor apparent as you remove the access panels during 
the initial inspection is a good indication of moisture, fungal 
growth, and possible decay.  

Glue failure and wood deterioration are often closely 
related, and the inspection of glued joints must include an 
examination of the adjacent wood structure. NOTE: Water 
need not be present for glue deterioration to take place. 

The inspection of a complete aircraft for glue or wood 
deterioration requires scrutiny of parts of the structure 
that may be known, or suspected, trouble spots. In many 
instances, these areas are boxed in or otherwise inaccessible. 
Considerable dismantling may be required. It may be 
necessary to cut access holes in some of the structures to 
facilitate the inspection. Do such work only in accordance 
with approved drawings or instructions in the maintenance 
manual for the aircraft concerned. If drawings and manuals 
are not available, engineering review may be required before 
cutting access holes.

Glued Joint Inspection
The inspection of glued joints in wooden aircraft structures 
presents considerable difficulties. Even where access to the 
joint exists, it is still difficult to positively assess the integrity 
of the joint. Keep this in mind when inspecting any glue joint.

Some common factors in premature glue deterioration 
include: 

• Chemical reactions of the glue caused by aging or 
moisture, extreme temperatures, or a combination of 
these factors.

• Mechanical forces caused mainly by wood shrinkage.

• Development of fungal growths.

An aircraft painted in darker colors experiences higher 
skin temperatures and heat buildup within its structure. 
Perform a more detailed inspection on a wooden aircraft 
structure immediately beneath the upper surfaces for signs 
of deteriorating adhesives.

Aircraft that are exposed to large cyclic changes of 
temperature and humidity are especially prone to wood 
shrinkage that may lead to glue joint deterioration. The 
amount of movement of a wooden member due to these 
changes varies with the size of each member, the rate of 
growth of the tree from which it was cut, and the way the 
wood was converted in relation to the grain. 

This means that two major structural members joined to each 
other by glue are not likely to have identical characteristics. 
Over a period of time, differential loads are transmitted 
across the glue joint because the two members do not react 
identically. This imposes stresses in the glue joint that can 
normally be accommodated when the aircraft is new and for 
some years afterwards. However, glue tends to deteriorate 
with age, and stresses at the glued joints may cause failure of 
the joints. This is a fact even when the aircraft is maintained 
under ideal conditions.

The various cuts of lumber from a tree have tendency to 
shrink and warp in the direction(s) indicated in the yellow 
area around each cut in Figure 6-5.       
                       
When checking a glue line (the edge of the glued joint) for 
condition, all protective coatings of paint should be removed 
by careful scraping. It is important to ensure that the wood is 
not damaged during the scraping operation. Scraping should 
cease immediately when the wood is revealed in its natural 
state and the glue line is clearly discernible. At this point in 
the inspection, it is important that the surrounding wood is 
dry; otherwise, you will get a false indication of the integrity 
of the glue line due to swelling of the wood and subsequent 
closing of the joint. 


6-5

Shrinkage

Shrinkage

Ply spar web

Inspection hole in web

Metal fitting Bolt

A

A

A

A

A

AAt all points marked       , check 
for glue condition and separation
with a feeler gauge.

Laminated spar

Figure 6-6. Inspection points for laminated glue joints.

Inspect the glue line using a magnifying glass. Where the glue 
line tends to part, or where the presence of glue cannot be 
detected or is suspect, probe the glue line with a thin feeler 
gauge. If any penetration is observed, the joint is defective. 
The structure usually dictates the feeler gauge thickness, 
but use the thinnest feeler gauge whenever possible. The 
illustration indicates the points a feeler gauge should 
probe. [Figure 6-6]

Pressure exerted on a joint either by the surrounding structure 
or by metal attachment devices, such as bolts or screws, can 
cause a false appearance of the glue condition. The joint must 
be relieved of this pressure before the glue line inspection 
is performed.

A glued joint may fail in service as a result of an accident or 
because of excessive mechanical loads having been imposed 
upon it. Glued joints are generally designed to take shear 
loads. If a joint is expected to take tension loads, it is secured 
by a number of bolts or screws in the area of tension loading. 
In all cases of glued joint failure, whatever the direction of 
loading, there should be a fine layer of wood fibers adhering 
to the glue. The presence of fibers usually indicates that the 
joint itself is not at fault.

Examination of the glue under magnification that does not 
reveal any wood fibers, but shows an imprint of the wood 
grain, indicates that the cause of the failure was the predrying 
of the glue before applying pressure during the manufacture 
of the joint. If the glue exhibits an irregular appearance with 
star-shaped patterns, this is an indication that precuring of the 
glue occurred before pressure was applied, or that pressure
had been incorrectly applied or maintained on the joint. If 

there is no evidence of wood fiber adhesion, there may also 
be glue deterioration.   

Wood Condition 
Wood decay and dry rot are usually easy to detect. Decay 
may be evident as either a discoloration or a softening of 
the wood. Dry rot is a term loosely applied to many types 
of decay, but especially to a condition that, in an advanced 
stage, permits the wood to be crushed to a dry powder. The 
term is actually a misnomer for any decay, since all fungi 
require considerable moisture for growth.

Dark discolorations of the wood or gray stains running 
along the grain are indicative of water penetration. If such 
discoloration cannot be removed by light scraping, replace 
the part. Disregard local staining of the wood by dye from a 
synthetic adhesive hardener. 

In some instances where water penetration is suspected, a 
few screws removed from the area in question reveal, by 
their degree of corrosion, the condition of the surrounding 
joint. [Figure 6-7] 
  
Another method of detecting water penetration is to remove 
the bolts holding the fittings at spar root-end joints, aileron 
hinge brackets, etc. Corrosion on the surface of such bolts 
and wood discoloration provide a useful indication of water 
penetration.

Plain brass screws are normally used for reinforcing glued 
wooden members. For hardwoods, such as mahogany or ash, 
steel screws may be used. Unless specified by the aircraft 


6-6

Position to check for separation

Expansion gap (not to be confused with joint separation)

Bulkhead ply web

Bulkhead frame member

Fuselage inner and outer ply skins

Wood screw

Screw hole

Reinforced laminated fuselage member

Corrosion indicating failure of bulkhead 
glued joint to fuselage side

Rib attach nail holes

DecayCrack

Plywood plates Strut attach point

Elongated bolt hole

Compression failure

Figure 6-7. Checking a glued joint for water penetration.

Figure 6-8. Areas likely to incur structural damage.

manufacturer, replace removed screws with new screws of 
identical length, but one gauge larger in diameter. 

Inspection experience with a particular type of aircraft 
provides insight to the specific areas most prone to water 
penetration and moisture entrapment. Wooden aircraft are 
more prone to the damaging effects of water, especially 
without the protection of covered storage. Control system 
openings, fastener holes, cracks or breaks in the finish, and 
the interfaces of metal fittings and the wood structure are 
points that require additional attention during an inspection. 
Additionally, windshield and window frames, the area 
under the bottom of entrance and cargo doors, and the lower 
sections of the wing and fuselage are locations that require 
detailed inspections for water damage and corrosion on 
all aircraft. 

The condition of the fabric covering on plywood surfaces 
provides an indication of the condition of the wood 
underneath. If there is any evidence of poor adhesion, cracks 
in the fabric, or swelling of the wood, remove the fabric to 
allow further inspection. The exposed surface shows water 
penetration by the existence of dark gray streaks along the 
grain and dark discoloration at ply joints or screw holes. 

Cracks in wood spars are often hidden under metal fittings 
or metal rib flanges and leading edge skins. Any time a 
reinforcement plate exists that is not feathered out on its ends, 

a stress riser exists at the ends of the plate. A failure of the 
primary structure can be expected at this point. [Figure 6-8] 

As part of the inspection, examine the structure for other 
defects of a mechanical nature, including any location where 
bolts secure fittings that take load-carrying members, or 
where the bolts are subject to landing or shear loads. Remove 
the bolts and examine the holes for elongation or surface 
crushing of the wood fibers. It is important to ensure the bolts 
are a good fit in the holes. Check for evidence of bruises or 
crushing of the structural member, which can be caused by 
overtorquing of the bolts.


6-7

Compression failure

Figure 6-9. Pronounced compression failure in wood beam.

Check all metal fittings that are attached to a wood structure 
for looseness, corrosion, cracks, or bending. Areas of 
particular concern are strut attach fittings, spar butt fittings, 
aileron and flap hinges, jury strut fittings, compression struts, 
control cable pulley brackets, and landing gear fittings. All 
exposed end grain wood, particularly the spar butts, should 
be inspected for cracking or checking.  

Inspect structural members for compression failures, which 
is indicated by rupture across the wood fibers. This is a 
serious defect that can be difficult to detect. If a compression 
failure is suspected, a flashlight beam shown along the 
member and running parallel to the grain, will assist in 
revealing it. The surface will appear to have minute ridges 
or lines running across the grain. Particular attention is 
necessary when inspecting any wooden member that has 
been subjected to abnormal bending or compression loads 
during a hard landing. If undetected, compression failures 
of the spar may result in structural failure of the wing during 
flight. [Figure 6-9]

When a member has been subjected to an excessive bending 
load, the failure appears on the surface that has been 
compressed. The surface subject to tension normally shows 
no defects. In the case of a member taking an excessive direct 
compression load, the failure is apparent on all surfaces.

The front and rear spars should be checked for longitudinal 
cracks at the ends of the plywood reinforcement plates 
where the lift struts attach. [Figure 6-8] Check the ribs on 
either side of the strut attach points for cracks where the cap 
strips pass over and under the spars, and for missing or loose 
rib-to-spar attach nails. All spars, those in the wing(s) and 
empennage, should be inspected on the face and top surface 
for compression cracks. A borescope can be utilized by 
accessing existing inspection holes.   

Various mechanical methods can be employed to enhance 
the visual inspection of wood structures. Tapping the subject 

area with a light plastic hammer or screwdriver handle should 
produce a sharp solid sound. If the suspected area sounds 
hollow and dull, further inspection is warranted. Use a sharp 
metal awl or thin-bladed screwdriver  to probe the area. The 
wood structure should be solid and firm. If the area is soft 
and mushy, the wood is rotted and disassembly and repair 
of the structure is necessary.

Repair of Wood Aircraft Structures
The standard for any repair is that it should return the aircraft 
or component to its original condition in strength, function, 
and aerodynamic shape. It should also be accomplished in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications and/or 
instructions, or other approved data.

The purpose of repairing all wood structural components 
is to obtain a structure as strong as the original. Major 
damage probably requires replacement of the entire damaged 
assembly, but minor damage can be repaired by removing 
or cutting away the damaged members and replacing them 
with new sections. This replacement may be accomplished by 
gluing, glue and nails, or glue and screw-reinforced splicing.

Materials
Several forms of wood are commonly used in aircraft. 

• Solid wood or the adjective “solid” used with such 
nouns as “beam” or “spar” refers to a member 
consisting of one piece of wood. 

• Laminated wood is an assembly of two or more layers 
of wood that have been glued together with the grain 
of all layers or laminations approximately parallel.

• Plywood is an assembled product of wood and glue 
that is usually made of an odd number of thin plies, or 
veneers, with the grain of each layer placed 90° with 
the adjacent ply or plies.

• High-density material includes compreg, impreg, or 
similar commercially made products, heat-stabilized 
wood, or any of the hardwood plywoods commonly 
used as bearing or reinforcement plates.

 
Suitable Wood 
The various species of wood listed in Figure 6-10 are 
acceptable for structural purposes when used for the repair 
of aircraft. Spruce is the preferred choice and the standard 
by which the other wood is measured. Figure 6-10 provides 
a comparison of other wood that may be suitable for aircraft 
repair. It lists the strength and characteristics of the wood 
in comparison to spruce. The one item common to all the 
species is that the slope of the grain cannot be steeper  
than 1:15.            


6-8

Species of Wood Strength Properties (as compared to spruce) 

1.15

1.15

1.15

1.15

1.15

1.15

1.15

Maximum 
Permissible

Grain Deviation
(slope of grain) 

Excellent for all uses.  Considered standard for this table.

May be used as substitute for spruce in same sizes or in 
slightly reduced sizes if reductions are substantiated. 
Difficult to work with hand tools. Some tendency to split and 
splinter during fabrication and much greater care in 
manufacture is necessary. Large solid pieces should be 
avoided due to inspection difficulties. Satisfactory for gluing .

Satisfactory characteristics of workability, warping, 
and splitting. May be used as direct substitute for spruce in 
same sizes if shear does not become critical. Hardness 
somewhat less than spruce. Satisfactory for gluing.

Less uniform in texture than spruce. May be used as direct 
substitute for spruce. Upland growth superior to lowland 
growth. Satisfactory for gluing.

Excellent working qualities and uniform in properties, but 
somewhat low in hardness and shock-resistance. 
Cannot be used as substitute for spruce without increase in
sizes to compensate for lesser strength. Satisfactory for gluing.

May be used as substitute for spruce in same sizes or in 
slightly reduced sizes if reductions are substantiated. 
Easy to work with hand tools. Gluing is difficult, but satisfactory 
joints can be obtained if suitable precautions are taken. 

Excellent working qualities. Should not be used as a direct 
substitute for spruce without carefully accounting for slightly 
reduced strength properties. Somewhat low in shock-resistance.
Satisfactory for gluing.

Remarks

100%

Exceeds spruce

Slightly exceeds spruce 
except 8% deficient in 
shear

Slightly exceeds spruce

Properties between 
85% and 96% those 
of spruce

Exceeds spruce

Slightly less than spruce 
except in compression 
(crushing) and shear  

Spruce (Picea) 
  Sitka (P. sitchensis) 
  Red (P. rubra) 
  White (P. glauca)

Douglas fir
(Pseudotsuga taxifolia) 

Noble fir
(Abies procera, also
known as Abies nobilis)

Western hemlock
(Tsuga heterophylla)

Northern white pine, also
known as Eastern white
pine (Pinus strobus)

Port Orford white cedar
(Chamaecyparis 
lawsoniana)

Yellow poplar 
(Liriodendron 
tulipifera) 

1 2 3 4

Figure 6-10. Selection and properties of wood for aircraft repairs.

All solid wood and plywood used for the construction and 
repair of aircraft should be of the highest quality and grade. 
For certificated aircraft, the wood should have traceability to a 
source that can provide certification to a military specification 
(MIL-SPEC). The term “aircraft quality” or “aircraft grade” 
is referred to and specified in some repair documents, but 
that grade wood cannot be purchased from a local lumber 
company. To purchase the material, contact one of the 
specialty aircraft supply companies and request a certification 
document with the order. The MIL-SPEC for solid spruce is 
MIL-S-6073 and for plywood it is MIL-P-6070B.  

When possible, fabricated wood components should be 
purchased from the aircraft manufacturer, or someone 
who may have a Parts Manufacturer Approval (PMA) to 

produce replacement parts for the aircraft. With either of 
these sources supplying the wood components, the mechanic 
can be assured of installing approved material. At the 
completion of the repair, as always, it is the responsibility of 
the person returning the aircraft to service to determine the 
quality of the replacement wood and the airworthiness of the  
subsequent repair. 

To help determine the suitability of the wood, inspect it 
for defects that would make it unsuitable material to repair 
or construct an aircraft. The type, location, and amount 
or size of the defects grade the wood for possible use. All 
woods used for structural repair of aircraft are classified as 
softwood. Softwood is typically used for construction and is 
graded based on strength, load carrying ability, and safety. 


6-9

Hardwoods, on the other hand, are typically appearance 
woods and are graded based on the number and size of clear 
cuttings from the tree.

Defects Permitted        
The following defects are permitted in the wood species used 
for aircraft repair that are identified in Figure 6-10: 

1.  Cross grain—Spiral grain, diagonal grain, or a 
combination of the two is acceptable if the grain 
does not diverge from the longitudinal axis of the 
material more than specified in Figure 6-10 column 
3. A check of all four faces of the board is necessary 
to determine the amount of divergence. The direction 
of free-flowing ink frequently assists in determining 
grain direction.

2.  Wavy, curly, and interlocked grain—Acceptable, if 
local irregularities do not exceed limitations specified 
for spiral and diagonal grain.

3.  Hard knots—Sound, hard knots up to 3⁄8-inch in 
diameter are acceptable if: (1) they are not projecting 
portions of I-beams, along the edges of rectangular or 
beveled unrouted beams, or along the edges of flanges 
of box beams (except in portions of low stress); (2) 
they do not cause grain divergence at the edges of the 
board or in the flanges of a beam more than specified 
in Figure 6-10 column 3; and (3) they are in the center 
third of the beam and not closer than 20-inches to 
another knot or other defect (pertains to 3⁄8-inch knots; 
smaller knots may be proportionately closer). Knots 
greater than ¼-inch must be used with caution.

4.  Pin knot clusters—Small clusters are acceptable if 
they produce only a small effect on grain direction.

5.  Pitch pockets—Acceptable in center portion of a beam 
if they are at least 14-inches apart when they lie in 
the same growth ring and do not exceed 1½-inches in 
length by 1⁄8-inch width by 1⁄8-inch depth, and if they 
are not along the projecting portions of I-beams, along 
the edges of rectangular or beveled unrouted beams, 
or along the edges of the flanges of box beams.

6.  Mineral streaks—Acceptable if careful inspection fails 
to reveal any decay.

Defects Not Permitted           
The following defects are not permitted in wood used for 
aircraft repair. If a defect is listed as unacceptable, please refer 
to the previous section, Defects Permitted, for acceptable 
conditions.

1.  Cross grain—unacceptable.

2.  Wavy, curly, and interlocked grain – unacceptable.

3.  Hard knots—unacceptable.

4.  Pin knot clusters—unacceptable, if they produce large 
effect on grain direction.

5.  Spike knots—knots running completely through the 
depth of a beam perpendicular to the annual rings 
and appear most frequently in quarter-sawed lumber. 
Reject wood containing this defect.

6.  Pitch pockets—unacceptable.

7.  Mineral streaks—unacceptable, if accompanied by 
decay.

8.  Checks, shakes, and splits—checks are longitudinal 
cracks extending, in general, across the annual rings. 
Shakes are longitudinal cracks usually between two 
annual rings. Splits are longitudinal cracks caused by 
artificially induced stress. Reject wood containing 
these defects.

9.  Compression—very detrimental to strength and is 
difficult to recognize readily, compression wood  
is characterized by high specific gravity, has the 
appearance of an excessive growth of summer wood, 
and in most species shows little contrast in color 
between spring wood and summer wood. If in doubt, 
reject the material or subject samples to toughness 
machine test to establish the quality of the wood. 
Reject all material containing compression wood.

10.  Compression failures—caused from overstress in 
compression due to natural forces during the growth 
of the tree, felling trees on rough or irregular ground, 
or rough handling of logs or lumber. Compression 
failures are characterized by a buckling of the fibers 
that appears as streaks substantially at right angles to 
the grain on the surface of the piece, and vary from 
pronounced failures to very fine hairlines that require 
close inspection to detect. Reject wood containing 
obvious failures. If in doubt, reject the wood or 
make a further inspection in the form of microscopic 
examination or toughness test, the latter being  
more reliable.

11.  Tension—forming on the upper side of branches and 
leaning trunks of softwood trees, tension wood is 
caused by the natural overstressing of trying to pull 
the branches and leaning trunk upright. It is typically 
harder, denser, and may be darker in color than normal 
wood, and is a serious defect, having higher than usual 
longitudinal shrinkage that may break down due to 
uneven shrinkage. When in doubt, reject the wood.  

12.  Decay—rot, dote, red heart, purple heart, etc., must 
not appear on any piece. Examine all stains and 
discoloration carefully to determine whether or not 
they are harmless or in a stage of preliminary or 
advanced decay.


6-10

Glues (Adhesives)
Because adhesives play a critical role in the bonding of 
aircraft structure, the mechanic must employ only those types 
of adhesives that meet all of the performance requirements 
necessary for use in certificated aircraft. The product must 
be used strictly in accordance with the aircraft and adhesive 
manufacturer’s instructions. All instructions must be 
followed exactly, including the mixing ratios, the ambient and 
surface temperatures, the open and closed assembly times, 
the gap-filling ability, or glue line thickness, the spread of 
the adhesive, whether one or two surfaces, and the amount 
of clamping pressure and time required for full cure of  
the adhesive.

AC 43.13-1 provides information on the criteria for 
identifying adhesives that are acceptable to the FAA. It 
stipulates the following:

1. Refer to the aircraft maintenance or repair manual for 
specific instructions on acceptable adhesive selection 
for use on that type aircraft.

2. Adhesives meeting the requirements of a MIL-
SPEC, Aerospace Material Specification (AMS), or 
Technical Standard Order (TSO) for wooden aircraft 
structures are satisfactory, provided they are found 
to be compatible with existing structural materials 
in the aircraft and fabrication methods to be used in  
the repair.

New adhesives have been developed in recent years, and some 
of the older ones are still in use. Some of the more common 
adhesives that have been used in aircraft construction and 
repair include casein glue, plastic resin glue, resorcinol glue, 
and epoxy adhesives. 

Casein glue should be considered obsolete for all aircraft 
repairs. The adhesive deteriorates when exposed to moisture 
and temperature variations that are part of the normal 
operating environment of any aircraft. 

NOTE: Some modern adhesives are incompatible with casein 
adhesive. If a joint that has previously been bonded with 
casein is to be reglued using another type adhesive, all traces 
of the casein must be scraped off before a new adhesive is 
applied. If any casein adhesive is left, residual alkalinity may 
cause the new adhesive to fail to cure properly. 

Plastic resin glue, also known as a urea-formaldehyde 
adhesive, came on the market in the middle to late 1930s. 
Tests and practical applications have shown that exposure 
to moist conditions, and particularly to a warm humid 
environment, under swell-shrink stress, leads to deterioration 
and eventual failure of the bond. For these reasons, plastic 
resin glue should be considered obsolete for all aircraft 

repairs. Discuss any proposed use of this type adhesive on 
aircraft with FAA engineering prior to use.     

Resorcinol glue, or resorcinol-formaldehyde glue, is a 
two-component synthetic adhesive consisting of resin 
and a catalyst. It was first introduced in 1943 and almost 
immediately found wide application in the wood boat-building 
and wood aircraft industry in which the combination of high 
durability and moderate-temperature curing was extremely 
important. It has better wet-weather and ultraviolet (UV) 
resistance than other adhesives. This glue meets all strength 
and durability requirements if the fit of the joint and proper 
clamping pressure results in a very thin and uniform bond line. 

The manufacturer’s product data sheets must be followed 
regarding mixing, usable temperature range, and the open 
and close assembly times. It is very important that this type 
of glue is used at the recommended temperatures because 
the full strength of the joint cannot be relied on if assembly 
and curing temperatures are below 70 °F. With that in mind, 
higher temperatures shorten the working life because of a 
faster cure rate, and open and closed assembly times must 
be shortened.  

Epoxy adhesive is a two-part synthetic resin product 
that depends less on joint quality and clamping pressure. 
However, many epoxies have not exhibited joint durability 
in the presence of moisture and elevated temperatures and 
are not recommended for structural aircraft bonding unless 
they meet the acceptable standards set forth by the FAA in 
AC 43.13-1, as referenced earlier in this chapter. 

Definition of Terms Used in the Glue Process  

• Close contact adhesive—a non-gap-filling adhesive 
(e.g., resorcinol-formaldehyde glue) suitable for use 
only in those joints where the surfaces to be joined can 
be brought into close contact by means of adequate 
pressure, to allow a glue line of no more than 0.005-
inch gap.

• Gap-filling adhesive—an adhesive suitable for use 
in those joints in which the surfaces to be joined 
may not be close or in continuous contact (e.g., 
epoxy adhesives) due either to the impracticability 
of applying adequate pressure or to the slight 
inaccuracies of fabricating the joint.

• Glue line—resultant layer of adhesive joining any two 
adjacent wood layers in the assembly.

• Single spread—spread of adhesive to one surface only.

• Double spread—spread of adhesive to both surfaces 
and equally divided between the two surfaces to  
be joined.


6-11

• Open assembly time—period of time between the 
application of the adhesive and the assembly of the 
joint components.

• Closed assembly time—time elapsing between the 
assembly of the joints and the application of pressure.

• Pressing or clamping time—time during which 
the components are pressed tightly together under 
recommended pressure until the adhesive cures (may 
vary from 10 to 150 pounds per square inch (psi) for 
softwoods, depending on the viscosity of the glue).

• Caul—a clamping device, usually two rigid wooden 
bars, to keep an assembly of flat panel boards aligned 
during glue-up. It is assembled with long bolts and 
placed on either side of the boards, one on top and 
another below, and parallel with the pipe/bar clamps. 
A caul is usually finished and waxed before each use 
to keep glue from adhering to it. 

• Adhesive pot life—time elapsed from the mixing 
of the adhesive components until the mixture must 
be discarded, because it no longer performs to its 
specifications. The manufacturer’s product data sheet 
may define this as working time or useful life; once 
expired, the adhesive must not be used. It lists the 
specific temperature and quantity at which the sample 
amount can be worked. Pot life is a product of time 
and temperature. The cooler the mix is kept, within 
the recommended temperature range, the longer it  
is usable. 

Preparation of Wood for Gluing
Satisfactory glue joints in aircraft should develop the 
full strength of the wood under all conditions of stress. 
To produce this result, the conditions involved in the 
gluing operation must be carefully controlled to obtain a 
continuous, thin, uniform film of solid glue in the joint 
with adequate adhesion to both surfaces of the wood. These  
conditions required:

1. Proper and equal moisture content of wood to be joined 
(8 to 12 percent).

2. Properly prepared wood surfaces that are machined 
or planed, and not sanded or sawed.

3. Selection of the proper adhesive for the intended task, 
which is properly prepared and of good quality. 

4. The application of good gluing techniques, including 
fitment, recommended assembly times, and adequate 
equal pressure applied to the joint.

5. Performing the gluing operation under the 
recommended temperature conditions.  



The surfaces to be joined must be clean, dry, and free from 
grease, oil, wax, paint, etc. Keep large prepared surfaces 
covered with a plastic sheet or masking paper prior to the 
bonding operation. It is advisable to clean all surfaces with 
a vacuum cleaner just prior to adhesive application.  

Smooth even surfaces produced on planers and joiners 
with sharp knives and correct feed adjustments are the best 
surfaces for gluing solid wood. The use of sawn surfaces 
for gluing has been discouraged for aircraft component 
assembly because of the difficulty in producing a surface 
free of crushed fibers. Glue joints made on surfaces that are 
covered with crushed fibers do not develop the normal full 
strength of the wood. 

Some of the surface changes in plywood, such as glazing 
and bleed-through, that occur in manufacture and may 
interfere with the adhesion of glue in secondary gluing 
are easily recognized. A light sanding of the surface with 
220-grit sandpaper in the direction of the grain restores the 
surface fibers to their original condition, removes the gloss, 
and improves the adhesion of the glue. In contrast to these 
recognized surface conditions, wax deposits from cauls used 
during hot pressing produce unfavorable gluing surfaces that 
are not easily detected.
   
Wetting tests are a useful means of detecting the presence of 
wax. A finely sprayed mist or drops of water on the surface of 
wax-coated plywood bead and do not wet the wood. This test 
may also give an indication of the presence of other materials 
or conditions that would degrade a glue joint. Only a proper 
evaluation of the adhesion properties, using gluing tests, 
determines the gluing characteristics of the plywood surfaces.

Preparing Glues for Use
The manufacturer’s directions should be followed for the 
preparation of any glue or adhesive. Unless otherwise specified 
by the glue manufacturer, clear, cool water should be used 
with glues that require mixing with water. The recommended 
proportions of glue, catalyst, and water or other solvent should 
be determined by the weight of each component. Mixing can 
be either by hand or machine. Whatever method is used, the 
glue should be thoroughly mixed and free of air bubbles, 
foam, and lumps of insoluble material.     
 
Applying the Glue/Adhesive 
To make a satisfactorily bonded joint, it is generally desirable 
to apply adhesive to both surfaces and join in a thin even layer. 
The adhesive can be applied with a brush, glue spreader, or 
a grooved rubber roller. Follow the adhesive manufacturer’s 
application instructions for satisfactory results. 


6-12

Arrows indicate pressure

Pressure block

Pressure block

Gap

Glue Gluing Pressure

Closed
Open

Closed
Open

Type of Assembly

Up to 50 minutes
Up to 12 minutes
Up to 40 minutes
Up to 10 minutes

Maximum Assembly Time

100–250 psi
100–250 psi

Less than 100 psi
Less than 100 psi

Resorcinol resins

Figure 6-11.  Even distribution of gluing pressure creates a strong, 
gap-free joint.

Figure 6-12. Examples of differences for open and closed assembly times.

Be careful to ensure the surfaces make good contact and the 
joint is positioned correctly before applying the adhesive. 
Keep the open assembly time as short as possible and do 
not exceed the recommended times indicated in the product 
data sheet. 

Pressure on the Joint
To ensure the maximum strength of the bonded surfaces, 
apply even force to the joint. Non-uniform gluing pressure 
commonly results in weak areas and strong areas in the 
same joint. The results of applied pressure are illustrated in 
Figure 6-11.  

Use pressure to squeeze the glue out into a thin continuous 
film between the wood layers, to force air from the joint, to 
bring the wood surfaces into intimate contact with the glue, 
and to hold them in this position during the setting of the glue. 
Pressure may be applied by means of clamps, elastic straps, 
weight, vacuum bags, or other mechanical devices. Other 
methods used to apply pressure to joints in aircraft gluing 
operations range from the use of brads, nails, and screws to 
the use of electric and hydraulic power presses. 

The amount of pressure required to produce strong joints in 
aircraft assembly operations may vary from 10 to 150 psi for 
softwoods and as high as 200 psi for hardwoods. Insufficient 

pressure to poorly machined or fitted wood joints usually 
results in a thick glue line, indicating a weak joint, and should 
be carefully avoided. 

High clamping pressure is neither essential nor desirable, 
provided good contact between the surfaces being joined is 
obtained. When pressure is applied, a small quantity of glue 
should be squeezed from the joint. This excess should be 
removed before it sets. It is important that full pressure be  
maintained on the joint for the entire cure time of the adhesive 
because the adhesive does not chemically relink and bond if 
it is disturbed before it is fully cured.

The full curing time of the adhesive is dependent on the 
ambient temperature; therefore, it is very important to 
follow the manufacturer’s product data sheets for all phases 
of the gluing operation from the shelf life to the moisture 
content of the wood to the proper mixing of the adhesive 
to the application, and especially to the temperature. 
The successful assembly and fabrication depends on the 
workmanship and quality of the joints and following the glue  
manufacturer’s instructions.

All gluing operations should be performed above 70 °F for 
proper performance of the adhesive. Higher temperatures 
shorten the assembly times, as does coating the pieces of 
wood with glue and exposing openly to the air. This open 
assembly promotes a more rapid thickening of the glue than 
pieces being mated together as soon as the spreading of the 
glue is completed. 

Figure 6-12 provides an example of resorcinol resin glue and 
the allowable assembly times and gluing pressure when in 
the open and closed assembly condition. All examples are 
for an ambient temperature of 75 °F.

Figure 6-13 provides examples of strong and weak glue joints 
resulting from different gluing conditions. A is a well-glued 
joint with a high percentage of wood failure made under 
proper conditions; B is a glue-starved joint resulting from 
the application of excessive pressure with thin glues; C is a 
dried glue joint resulting from an excessively long assembly 
time and/or insufficient pressure.


6-13

A

B

C

Figure 6-13. Strong and weak glue joints.

Figure 6-14. An example of good glue joint.

Testing Glued Joints 
Satisfactory glue joints in aircraft should develop the full 
strength of the wood under all conditions of stress. Tests 
should be made by the mechanic prior to gluing a joint of 
a major repair, such as a wing spar. Whenever possible, 
perform tests using pieces cut from the actual wood used 
for the repair under the same mechanical and environmental 
conditions that the repair will undergo.

Perform a sample test using two pieces of scrap wood from 
the intended repair, each cut approximately 1" × 2" × 4". The 
pieces should be joined by overlapping each approximately 2 
inches. The type of glue, pressure, and curing time should be 
the same as used for the actual repair. After full cure, place 
the test sample in a bench vise and break the joint by exerting 
pressure on the overlapping member. The fractured glue 
faces should show a high percentage of at least 75 percent 
of the wood fibers evenly distributed over the fractured glue 
surface. [Figure 6-14]       
       

Repair of Wood Aircraft Components
Wing Rib Repairs 
Ribs that have sustained damage may be repaired or 
replaced, depending upon the type of damage and location 
in the aircraft. If new parts are available from the aircraft 
manufacturer or the holder of a PMA for the part, it is 
advisable to replace the part rather than to repair it. 

If you make a repair to a rib, do the work in such a manner 
and using materials of such quality that the completed repair 
is at least equal to the original part in aerodynamic function, 
structural strength, deterioration, and other qualities affecting 
airworthiness, such as fit and finish. When manufacturer’s 
repair manuals or instructions are not available, acceptable 
methods of repairing damaged ribs are described in AC 
43.13-1 under Wood Structure Repairs. 

When necessary, a rib can be fabricated and installed using 
the same materials and dimensions from a manufacturer-
approved drawing or by reference to an original rib. However, 
if you fabricated it from an existing rib, you must provide 
evidence to verify that the dimensions are accurate and the 
materials are correct for the replacement part.  
 
You can repair a cap strip of a wood rib using a scarf splice. 
The repair is reinforced on the side opposite the wing 
covering by a spruce block that extends beyond the scarf 
joint not less than three times the thickness of the strips being 
repaired. Reinforce the entire splice, including the spruce 
reinforcing block, on each side with a plywood side plate.  


6-14

A

A

3A 10A

Face grain of plywood side plates

Spruce block

Top view

Side view

3A

16A

Plywood face plates

A

B

E

3A 5A 3A

Splice plate

D

Direction of face
grain of plywood

C

                    and      are 
original dimensions.
Reinforcement 
plates shall be plywood glued and nailed.

A B C D E

A

10A

Face grain 
of plywood

                    and      are original 
dimensions.
A B C D E

E

D

C

B

Figure 6-15. A rib cap strip repair.

Figure 6-16.  Cap strip repair at cross member.

Figure 6-17. Cap strip repair at a spar.

The scarf length bevel is 10 times dimension A (thickness of 
the rib cap strip) with the spruce reinforcement block being 
16 times dimension A (the scarf length plus extension on 
either end of the scarf). The plywood splice plates should 
be of the same material and thickness as the original plates 
used to fabricate the rib. The spruce block should have a 5:1 
bevel on each end. [Figure 6-15]

These specific rib repairs describing the use of one scarf 
splice implies that either the entire forward or aft portion of 
the cap strip beyond the damage can be replaced to complete 
the repair and replace the damaged section. Otherwise, 
replacement of the damaged section may require a splice 
repair at both ends of the replaced section of the cap strip 
using the indicated dimensions for cutting and reinforcing 
of each splice.

When a cap strip is to be repaired at a point where there is 
a joint between it and cross members of the rib, make the 
repair by reinforcing the scarf joint with plywood gussets, 
as shown in Figure 6-16.

If a cap strip must be repaired where it crosses a spar, 
reinforce the joint with a continuous gusset extending over 
the spar, as shown in Figure 6-17.

The scarf joints referred to in the rib repairs are the most 
satisfactory method of fabricating an end joint between two 
solid wood members.  When the scarf splice is used to repair 
a solid wood component, the mechanic must be aware of the 
direction and slope of the grain.  To ensure the full strength 
of the joint, the scarf cut is made in the general direction 
of the grain on both connecting ends of the wood and then 
correctly oriented to each other when glued. [Figure 6-18]  

The trailing edge of a rib can be replaced and repaired by 
removing the damaged portion of the cap strip and inserting 

a softwood block of white pine, spruce, or basswood. The 
entire repair is then reinforced with plywood gussets and 
nailed and glued, as shown in Figure 6-19.


6-15

IncorrectA

IncorrectB

CorrectC

Top

Plywood, nail, and glue

Spruce block

Damaged area

Damaged area

Figure 6-18. Relationship of scarf slope to grain slope.

Figure 6-19. Rib trailing edge repair.

Compression ribs are of many different designs, and the 
proper method of repairing any part of this type of rib 
is specified by the manufacturer. All repairs should be 
performed using recommended or approved practices, 
materials and adhesives. 

Figure 6-20A illustrates the repair of a compression rib of 
the I section type (i.e., wide, shallow cap strips, and a center 
plywood web with a rectangular compression member on 
each side of the web). The rib damage suggests that the upper 
and lower cap strips, the web member, and the compression 
members are cracked completely through. To facilitate 
this repair, cut the compression members as shown in 
Figure 6-20D and repair as recommended using replacement 
sections to the rear spar. Cut the damaged cap strips and 
repair as shown in Figure 6-20, replacing the aft section of 
the cap strips. Plywood side plates are then bonded on each 
side diagonally to reinforce the damaged web as shown in 
Figure 6-20, A-A.
 

Figure 6-20B illustrates a compression rib of the type that is 
a standard rib with rectangle compression members added to 
one side and a plywood web to the other side. The method 
used in this repair is essentially the same as in Figure 6-20A, 
except that the plywood reinforcement plate, shown in 
Figure 6-20B-B, is continued the full distance between the 
spars.

Figure 6-20C illustrates a compression rib of the I type with 
a rectangular vertical member on each side of the web. The 
method of repair is essentially the same as in Figure 6-20A, 
except the plywood reinforcement plates on each side, shown 
in Figure 6-20C-C, are continued the full distance between 
the spars.

Wing Spar Repairs 
Wood wing spars are fabricated in various designs using solid 
wood, plywood, or a combination of the two. [Figure 6-21]

When a spar is damaged, the method of repair must conform 
to the manufacturer’s instructions and recommendations. In 
the absence of manufacturer’s instructions, contact the FAA 
for advice and approval before making repairs to the spar and 
following recommendations in AC 43.13-1. If instructions 
are not available for a specific type of repair, it is highly 
recommended that you request appropriate engineering  
assistance to evaluate and provide guidance for the  
intended repair. 

Shown in Figure 6-22 is a recommended method to repair 
either a solid or laminated rectangle spar. The slope of the 
scarf in any stressed part, such as a spar, should not be steeper 
than 15 to 1.

Unless otherwise specified by the aircraft manufacturer, a 
damaged spar may be spliced at almost any point except at 
wing attachment fittings, landing gear fittings, engine mount 
fittings, or lift-and-interplane strut fittings. These fittings may 
not overlap any part of the splice. The reinforcement plates 
of the splice should not interfere with the proper attachment 
or alignment of the fittings. Taper reinforcement plates on 
the ends at a 5:1 slope [Figure 6-23].

The use of a scarf joint to repair a spar or any other component 
of an aircraft is dependent on the accessibility to the damaged 
section. It may not be possible to utilize a scarf repair where 
recommended, so the component may have to be replaced. 
A scarf must be precisely cut on both adjoining pieces to 
ensure an even thin glue line; otherwise, the joint may not 
achieve full strength. The primary difficulty encountered in 
making this type of joint is obtaining the same bevel on each 
piece. [Figure 6-24] 


6-16

6A

12A recommended
10A minimum

6A

2A

¼ A

¼ A

A

Plywood reinforcement same thickness and face grain direction as original

Repair

Repair

Repair

See 

A

B

C

D

D

3A 3A

A

A

B

B

C

C

DAM
AGE

DAM
AGE

DAM
AGE

A A- B B- C C-

Figure 6-20. Typical compression rib repair. 

The mating surfaces of the scarf must be smooth. You can 
machine smooth a saw cut using any of a variety of tools, 
such as a plane, a joiner, or a router. For most joints, you 
need a beveled fixture set at the correct slope to complete 
the cut. Figure 6-25 illustrates one method of producing an 
accurate scarf joint.

Once the two bevels are cut for the intended splice, clamp the 
pieces to a flat guide board of similar material. Then, work a 
sharp, fine-tooth saw all the way through the joint. Remove 

the saw, decrease pressure, and tap one of the pieces on the 
end to close the gap. Work the saw again through the joint. 
Continue this procedure until the joint is perfectly parallel 
with matching surfaces. Then, make a light cut with the grain, 
using a sharp plane, to smooth both mating surfaces. 

Another method of cutting a scarf uses a simple scarf-cutting 
fixture that you can also fabricate for use with a router. Extend 
the work piece beyond the edge so the finished cut results in 
a feathered edge across the end of the scarf. [Figure 6-26] 


6-17

Box I Double I

C Plain rectangular Routed

A

6A recommended
5A minimum 2A

6A recommended
5A minimum15A minimum

No fittings within these limits

Direction of grain
if spruce or outer 

face grain if 
plywood

1/4 A

A

Figure 6-21. Typical splice repair of solid rectangular spar. 

Figure 6-22. Typical splice repair of solid rectangular spar.

There are numerous tools made by individuals, and there are 
commercial plans for sale with instructions for building scarf- 
cutting tools. Most of them work, but some are better than 
others. The most important requirement for the tool is that it 
produces a smooth, repeatable cut at the appropriate angle.  

Local damage to the top or bottom edge of a solid spar may 
be repaired by removing the damaged portion and fabricating 
a replacement filler block of the same material as the spar. 
Full width doublers are fabricated as shown and then all three 
pieces are glued and clamped to the spar. Nails or screws 


6-18

New section to be spliced in

Guide board

Undamaged section

Routed scaft

Clamp work piece to fixture

Edges are guide for router base

Slope fixed as appropriate
10:1 to 12:1, etc.

Feathered end

5:1 slope

Correctly beveled piecesA

Incorrect beveled piecesB

Gap

Slope 10 to 1 in solid wood

Figure 6-23. Tapered faceplate. 

Figure 6-24. Beveled scarf joint.

Figure 6-25. Making a scarf joint. 

Figure 6-26. Scarf cutting fixture.

should not be used in spar repairs. A longitudinal crack in 
a solid spar may be repaired using doublers made from the 
proper thickness plywood. Care must be taken to ensure the 
doublers extend the minimum distance beyond the crack. 
[Figure 6-27] 

A typical repair to a built-up I spar is illustrated using 
plywood reinforcement plates with solid wood filler blocks. 
As with all repairs, the reinforcement plate ends should be 
feathered out to a 5:1 slope. [Figure 6-28]  

Repair methods for the other types of spar illustrated at the 
start of this section all follow the basic steps of repair. The 
wood used should be of the same type and size as the original 
spar. Always splice and reinforce plywood webs with the 
same type of plywood as the original. Do not use solid wood 
to replace plywood webs because plywood is stronger in shear 
than solid wood of the same thickness. The splices and scarf 
cuts must be of the correct slope for the repair with the face 
grain running in the same direction as the original member. 
Not more than two splices should be made in any one spar. 

When a satisfactory repair to a spar cannot be accomplished, 
the spar should be replaced. New spars may be obtained from 
the manufacturer or the holder of a PMA for that part. An 
owner-produced spar may be installed provided it is made 
from a manufacturer-approved drawing. Care should be taken 
to ensure that any replacement spars accurately match the 
manufacturer’s original design. 


6-19

Face grain direction of doublers

  LONGITUDINAL CRACK
Note: 1. Make doublers from plywood for 
  longitudinal crack repairs on spar face
 2. Make doublers from solid wood (same 
  species as spar) for insert repair of top 
  or bottom of spar

3A3A ¼ A

A

B

B/10 (max)

No fitting within these limits

Local damageLocal damage

Scarf at ends of insert
No less than 12 to 15 to 1 slope (minimum)

Insert block—same species as spar

Direction of grain in plywood reinforcement
plates to be same as original web

2A 2A 2A

6A6A 15A

½ B

ANo fitting within these limits

Plywood

B

A
A

Plywood

Solid wood filler block Solid wood filler block

Solid wood filler blockSolid wood filler block

Figure 6-27. A method to repair damage to solid spar.

Figure 6-28. Repairs to a built-up I spar.

Bolt and Bushing Holes
All bolts and bushings used in aircraft structures must fit 
snugly into the holes. If the bolt or bushing is loose, movement 
of the structure allows it to enlarge the hole. In the case of 
elongated bolt holes in a spar or cracks in close proximity 
to the bolt holes, the repair may require a new section to be 
spliced in the spar, or replacement of the entire spar. 

All holes drilled in a wood structure to receive bolts or 
bushings should be of such size that inserting the bolt or 
bushing requires a light tapping with a wood or rawhide 
mallet. If the hole is so tight that heavy blows are necessary, 

deformation of the wood may cause splitting or unequal load 
distribution.

For boring accurate smooth holes, it is recommended that 
a drill press be utilized where possible. Holes should be 
drilled with sharp bits using slow steady pressure. Standard 
twist drills can be used in wood when sharpened to a 60° 
angle. However, a better designed drill was developed for 
wood boring called a lip and spur or brad point. The center 
of the drill has a spur with a sharp point and four sharp 
corners to center and cut rather than walk as a conventional 
drill sometimes does. It has the outside corner of the cutting 


6-20

edges leading, so that it cuts the periphery of the hole first 
and maximizes the chance that the wood fibers cut cleanly, 
leaving a smooth bore.

Forstner bits bore precise, flat bottomed holes in wood, in 
any orientation with respect to the wood grain. They must be 
used in a drill press because more force is needed for their 
cutting action. Also, they are not designed to clear chips 
from the hole and must be pulled out periodically to do this. 
A straight, accurate bore-through hole can be completed by 
drilling through the work piece and into a piece of wood 
backing the work piece.

All holes bored for bolts that are to hold fittings in place 
should match the hole diameter in the fitting. Bushings 
made of steel, aluminum, or plastic are sometimes used to 
prevent crushing the wood when bolts are tightened. Holes 
drilled in the wood structure should be sealed after being 
drilled. This can be accomplished by application of varnish 
or other acceptable sealer into the open hole. The sealer 
must be allowed to dry or cure thoroughly prior to the bolts 
or bushings being installed.  

Plywood Skin Repairs
Plywood skin can be repaired using a number of different 
methods depending on the size of the hole and its location 
on the aircraft. Manufacturer’s instructions, when available, 
should be the first source of a repair scheme. AC 43.13-1 
provides other acceptable methods of repair. Some of those 
are featured in the following section. 

Fabric Patch  
A fabric patch is the simplest method to repair a small hole in 
plywood. This repair is used on holes not exceeding 1-inch in 
diameter after being trimmed to a smooth outline. The edges 
of the trimmed hole should first be sealed, preferably with 
a two-part epoxy varnish. This varnish requires a long cure 
time, but it provides the best seal on bare wood.

The fabric used for the patch should be of an approved 
material using the cement recommended by the manufacturer 
of the fabric system. The fabric patch should be cut with 
pinking shears and overlap the plywood skin by at least 
1-inch. A fabric patch should not be used to repair holes in 
the leading edge of a wing, in the frontal area of the fuselage, 
or nearer than 1-inch to any frame member. 
   
Splayed Patch
A splayed patch is a flush patch. The term splayed denotes 
that the edges of the patch are tapered, with the slope cut at 
a 5:1 ratio to the thickness of the skin. This may be used for 
small holes where the largest dimension of the hole to be 
repaired is not more than 15 times the skin thickness and the 

skin is not more than 1⁄10-inch thick. This calculates to nothing 
larger than a 1½-inch trimmed hole in very thin plywood.

Using the sample 1⁄10-inch thick plywood and a maximum 
trimmed hole size of 1½-inches, and cutting a 5:1 scarf, 
results in a 2½-inches round section to be patched. The patch 
should be fabricated with a 5:1 scarf, from the same type and 
thickness plywood as the surface being repaired.     

Glue is applied to the beveled edges and the patch is set with 
the grain parallel to the surface being repaired. A pressure 
plate of thicker plywood cut to the exact size of the patch is 
centered over the patch covered with waxed paper. A suitable 
weight is used for pressure until the glue has set. The repair 
is then sanded and finished to match the original surface. 
[Figure 6-29] 

Surface Patch
Plywood skins not over 1⁄8-inch thick that are damaged 
between or along framing members may be repaired with a 
surface or overlay patch. Surface patches located aft of the 
10 percent chord line, or which wrap around the leading edge 
and terminate aft of the 10 percent chord line, are permissible. 
You can use surface patches to patch trimmed holes up to 
a 50-inch perimeter, and may cover an area as large as one 
frame or rib space. 

Trim the damaged area to a rectangle or triangular shape with 
rounded corners. The radius of the corners must be at least 5 
times the skin thickness. Doublers made of plywood at least 
¼-inch thick are reinforcements placed under the edge of 
the hole inside the skin. Nail and glue the doublers in place. 
Extend the doublers from one framing member to another 
and strengthen at the ends by saddle gussets attached to the 
framing members. [Figure 6-30]

The surface patch is sized to extend beyond the cutout as 
indicated. All edges of the patch are beveled, but the leading 
edge of the patch should be beveled at an angle at least 4:1 of 
the skin thickness. The face-grain direction of the patch must 
be in the same direction of the original skin. Where possible, 
weights are used to apply pressure to a surface patch until 
the glue has dried. If the location of the patch precludes the 
use of weight, small round head wood screws can be used 
to apply glue pressure to secure the patch. After a surface 
patch has dried, the screws can be removed and the holes 
filled. The patch should be covered with fabric that overlaps 
the original surface by at least 2-inches. The fabric should 
be from one of the approved fabric covering systems using 
the procedures recommended by the manufacturer to cement 
and finish the fabric.  


6-21

Face grain of patch parallel to face grain of skin

Pressure plate 1∕8" or ¼" plywood

Waxed paper or plastic wrap

Weights or clamp

Trim to circular shape (15T maximum diameter) 
Minimum distance to frame = 15T

T = 1∕10" or less

Plywood skin
5T 5T

Figure 6-29. Splayed patch.

Plug Patch
Two types of plug patch, oval and round, may be used on 
plywood skins. Because the plug patch is only a skin repair, 
use it only for damage that does not involve the supporting 
structure under the skin.

Cut the edges of a plug patch at right angles to the surface 
of the skin. Cut the skin also to a clean round or oval hole 
with edges at right angles to the surface. Cut the patch to the 
exact size of the hole; when installed, the edge of the patch 
forms a butt joint with the edge of the hole.

You can use a round plug patch where the cutout repair is no 
larger than 6-inches in diameter. Sample dimensions for holes 
of 4-inches and 6-inches in diameter appear in Figure 6-31.

The following steps provide a method for making a round 
plug patch:

1. Cut a round patch large enough to cover the
intended repair. If applicable for size, use the sample
dimensions in Figure 6-31. The patch must be of the
same material and thickness as the original skin.

2. Place the patch over the damaged spot and mark a
circle of the same size as the patch.

3. Cut the skin inside the marked circle so that the
plug patch fits snugly into the hole around the entire
perimeter.

4. Cut a doubler of soft quarter-inch plywood, such as
poplar. A small patch is cut so that its outside radius
is 5⁄8-inch greater than the hole to be patched and
the inside radius is 5⁄8-inch less. For a large patch
the dimensions would be increased to 7⁄8-inch each.
If the curvature of the skin surface is greater than a
rise of 1⁄8-inch in 6-inches, the doubler should be
preformed to the curvature using hot water or steam.
As an alternative, the doubler may be laminated from
two pieces of 1⁄8-inch plywood.

5. Cut the doubler through one side so that it can be
inserted through the hole to the back of the skin.
Place the patch plug centered on the doubler and mark 
around its perimeter. Apply a coat of glue outside the
line to the outer half of the doubler surface that will
bear against the inner surface of the skin.

6. Install the doubler by slipping it through the cutout
hole and place it so that the mark is concentric with the 
hole. Nail it in place with nailing strips, while holding 
a bucking bar or similar object under the doubler for
backup. Place waxed paper between the nailing strips 
and the skin. Cloth webbing under the nailing strips
facilitates removal of the strips and nails after the
glue dries.

7. After the glue has set for the installed doubler, and
you have removed the nail strips, apply glue to the
inner half of the doubler and to the patch plug. Drill


6-22

Spar

30T

12T

8T (1" minimum)

Rib cap

Plywood saddle gusset
Minimum thickness = T
Nailed and glued in place

Patch Plywood skin

Rib cap

4T

12T 12TPatch Patch

Section A-A

Section B-B Section C-C

Unsupported lap

A

C

CB B

B

A

A

C

T

T

T

T T T

B

A

Damage

B

C

A

A

B

Front Spar

Rear Spar

Ribs

Trimmed Opening

Minimum Radius 5T

Saddle Gusset

3T (¼" Minimum)

Figure 6-30. Surfaces patches.


6-23

Outer edge of doubler

Nail holes

Screw holes—to be filled before finishing

Butt joint of patch to skin

Plywood skin Saw cut in doubler Plywood doubler

Plug patch

Inner edge of doubler

Saw cut in doubler

Butt joint of patch to skin

Grain direction of skin, patch, and doubler 

A

B

C

(Two rows of screws and nails are required for a large patch.)

(Laminate doubler from two pieces of 
1∕8" ply in areas of skin curvature.)

¼"

2 5/8"           2"         1 ³/8"
3 7/8"           3"         2 1/8"

Small circular plug patch
Large circular plug patch

A B C

DIMENSIONS

Figure 6-31. Round plug patch assembly.


6-24

Outer edge of doubler

Butt joint of patch to skin

Plywood skin

(Two rows of screws and nails required for large patch.)

Inner edge of doubler

Nail holes

Screw holes—to be filled before finishing
A

C

B

DE

F

Plywood doubler (grain parallel to skin)

Butt joint of patch to skin

Plug patch (grain parallel to skin)

1"
1"

 1½"       2 ³∕8"        1½"         7∕8"           3"          4½"
 2"          3 ³∕8"        2 ½"            1³∕8"                5"           7"       

Small 
Large 

D E FA B C

PATCH DIMENSIONS

Figure 6-32. An oval plug patch.

holes around the plug’s circumference to accept No. 
4 round head wood screws. Insert the plug with the 
grain aligned to the surface wood.

8. Apply the pressure to the patch by means of the wood 
screws. No other pressure is necessary.

9. After the glue has set, remove the screws and fill the 
nail and screw holes. Sand and finish to match the 
original surface.

The steps for making an oval plug patch are identical to those 
for making the round patch. The maximum dimensions for 
large oval patches are 7-inches long and 5-inches wide. Oval 
patches must be cut, so when installed, the face grain matches 
the direction of the original surface. [Figure 6-32] 
 
Scarf Patch
A properly prepared and installed scarf patch is the best repair 
for damaged plywood and is preferred for most skin repairs. 
The scarf patch has edges beveled at a 12:1 slope; the splayed 
patch is beveled at a 5:1 slope. The scarf patch also uses 
reinforcements under the patch at the glue joints.

Much of the outside surface of a plywood aircraft is curved. 
If the damaged plywood skin has a radius of curvature not 
greater than 100 times the skin thickness, you can install 
a scarf patch. However, it may be necessary to soak or 
steam the patch, to preform it prior to gluing it in place. 
Shape backing blocks or other reinforcements to fit the  
skin curvature.

You can make scarf cuts in plywood with various tools, such 
as a hand plane, spoke shave, a sharp scraper, or sanding 
block. Sawn or roughly filed surfaces are not recommended 
because they are normally inaccurate and do not form the 
best glue joint. 

The Back of the Skin is Accessible for Repair 
When the back of a damaged plywood skin is accessible, 
such as a fuselage skin, repair it with scarf patches cut and 
installed with the grain parallel to the surface skin. Details 
for this type of repair are shown in Figure 6-33.

Figure 6-33, Section A-A, shows methods of support for a 
scarf between frame members using permanent backing and 


6-25

Figure 6-33. Scarf patches, back of skin accessible.

Backing

T

12T

C C-Section

Patch

3T
Backing

Framing member

Clamp and bond backing
to frame and skin

B B-Section

Patch

Backing

Clamp and bond backing
to frame and skin

12T

3T
T

30T
12T

T

Plywood saddle gusset minimum 
thickness “T” bonded in placeA A-Section

Patch

3T (¼" minimum)8T
T

T
12T

D D-Section 3T

Waxed paper or 
plastic wrap

Nailing strips

C C

C C

B

B

A

A

B B

D D

C

C

Nailing strips

Maximum diameter 25T

Temporary backing

Minimum thickness        bonded in placeT

Saddle Gusset

Temporary backing block-shape to fit skin


6-26

gussets. When the damage follows or extends to a framing 
member, support the scarf as shown in section B-B. When 
the scarf does not quite extend to a frame member, support 
the patch as shown in section C-C. 

Damage that does not exceed 25 times the skin thickness 
(31⁄8-inches for 1⁄8-inch thick skin) after being trimmed to 
a circular shape can be repaired as shown in section D-D, 
provided the trimmed opening is not nearer than 15 times 
the skin thickness to a frame member (17⁄8-inches for 1⁄8-inch 
thick skin). 

A temporary backing block is carefully shaped from solid 
wood and fitted to the inside surface of the skin. A piece of 
waxed paper or plastic wrap is placed between the block 
and the underside of the skin. The scarf patch is installed 
and temporarily attached to the backing block, being held 
together in place with nailing strips. When the glue sets, 
remove the nails and block, leaving a flush surface on both 
sides of the repaired skin.

The Back of the Skin Is Not Accessible for Repair
To repair a section of the skin with a scarf patch when access 
to the back side is not possible, use the following steps to 
facilitate a repair, as shown in Figure 6-34.

Cut out and remove the damaged section. Carefully mark 
and cut the scarf around the perimeter of the hole. Working 
through the cutout, install backing strips along all edges that 
are not fully backed by a rib or spar. To prevent warping of 
the skin, fabricate backing strips from soft-textured plywood, 
such as yellow poplar or spruce, rather than a piece of  
solid wood. 

Use nailing strips to hold backing strips in place while the 
glue sets. Use a bucking bar, where necessary, to provide 
support for nailing. A saddle gusset of plywood should 
support the end of the backing strip at all junctions between 
the backing strips and ribs or spars.  If needed, nail and bond 
the new gusset plate to the rib or spar. It may be necessary 
to remove and replace an old gusset plate with a new saddle 
gusset, or nail a new gusset over the original.

Unlike some of the other type patches that are glued and 
installed as one process, this repair must wait for the glue to 
set on the backing strips and gussets. At that point, the scarf 
patch can be cut and fit to match the grain, and glued, using 
weight for pressure on the patch as appropriate. When dry, 
fill and finish the repair to match the original surface.   


6-27

T

12T

C C-Section

Patch

Plywood skin

T

3T (¼" minimum)

12T

B B-Section

Patch

Plywood or spruce

Rib cap

Plywood skin

30T
12T

T

Plywood saddle gusset nail and glue in place
(minimum thickness       )

Plywood skin

A A-Section

Rib cap8T (1" minimum)

B B

C

C
C

C

A

A

B B

B B

A

A

B B
A

A

C

C
Rear spar

Front spar

Ribs

Saddle gusset

T

3T (¼" minimum)

Spar

Figure 6-34. Scarf patches, back of skin not accessible.


6-28

