
2-1

Chapter 2

Aerodynamics, Aircraft 
Assembly, and Rigging
Introduction
Three topics that are directly related to the manufacture, 
operation, and repair of aircraft are: aerodynamics, aircraft 
assembly, and rigging. Each of these subject areas, though 
studied separately, eventually connect to provide a scientific 
and physical understanding of how an aircraft is prepared for 
flight. A logical place to start with these three topics is the study 
of basic aerodynamics. By studying aerodynamics, a person 
becomes familiar with the fundamentals of aircraft flight. 


2-2

30

25

20

15

10

  5

  0

Inches of
Mercury

Millibars

1016

847

677

508

339

  170

  0

29.92"

Standard
Sea Level
Pressure

Hg 1013

Standard
Sea Level
Pressure

mb

A t m o s p h e r i c  P r e s s u r e

V
a
cu

u
m

0.491 lb Mercury

1"

1"

1"

Figure 2-1. Barometer used to measure atmospheric pressure.

Basic Aerodynamics 
Aerodynamics is the study of the dynamics of gases, the 
interaction between a moving object and the atmosphere 
being of primary interest for this handbook. The movement of 
an object and its reaction to the air flow around it can be seen 
when watching water passing the bow of a ship. The major 
difference between water and air is that air is compressible 
and water is incompressible. The action of the airflow over 
a body is a large part of the study of aerodynamics. Some 
common aircraft terms, such as rudder, hull, water line, and 
keel beam, were borrowed from nautical terms. 

Many textbooks have been written about the aerodynamics 
of aircraft flight. It is not necessary for an airframe and 
powerplant (A&P) mechanic to be as knowledgeable as an 
aeronautical engineer about aerodynamics. The mechanic 
must be able to understand the relationships between 
how an aircraft performs in flight and its reaction to the 
forces acting on its structural parts. Understanding why 
aircraft are designed with particular types of primary and 
secondary control systems and why the surfaces must be 
aerodynamically smooth becomes essential when maintaining 
today’s complex aircraft. 

The theory of flight should be described in terms of the laws 
of flight because what happens to an aircraft when it flies 
is not based upon assumptions, but upon a series of facts. 
Aerodynamics is a study of laws which have been proven 
to be the physical reasons why an airplane flies. The term 
aerodynamics is derived from the combination of two Greek 
words: “aero,” meaning air, and “dyne,” meaning force of 
power. Thus, when “aero” joins “dynamics” the result is 
“aerodynamics”—the study of objects in motion through 
the air and the forces that produce or change such motion. 

Aerodynamically, an aircraft can be defined as an object 
traveling through space that is affected by the changes 
in atmospheric conditions. To state it another way, 
aerodynamics covers the relationships between the aircraft, 
relative wind, and atmosphere. 

The Atmosphere
Before examining the fundamental laws of flight, several 
basic facts must be considered, namely that an aircraft 
operates in the air. Therefore, those properties of air that 
affect the control and performance of an aircraft must be 
understood. 

The air in the earth’s atmosphere is composed mostly of 
nitrogen and oxygen. Air is considered a fluid because it 
fits the definition of a substance that has the ability to flow 
or assume the shape of the container in which it is enclosed. 
If the container is heated, pressure increases; if cooled, the 

pressure decreases. The weight of air is heaviest at sea level 
where it has been compressed by all of the air above. This 
compression of air is called atmospheric pressure. 

Pressure
Atmospheric pressure is usually defined as the force exerted 
against the earth’s surface by the weight of the air above 
that surface. Weight is force applied to an area that results 
in pressure. Force (F) equals area (A) times pressure (P), or 
F = AP. Therefore, to find the amount of pressure, divide 
area into force (P = F/A). A column of air (one square inch) 
extending from sea level to the top of the atmosphere weighs 
approximately 14.7 pounds; therefore, atmospheric pressure 
is stated in pounds per square inch (psi). Thus, atmospheric 
pressure at sea level is 14.7 psi.

Atmospheric pressure is measured with an instrument 
called a barometer, composed of mercury in a tube that 
records atmospheric pressure in inches of mercury ("Hg). 
[Figure 2-1] The standard measurement in aviation altimeters 
and U.S. weather reports has been "Hg. However, worldwide 
weather maps and some non-U.S. manufactured aircraft 
instruments indicate pressure in millibars (mb), a metric unit. 
At sea level, when the average atmospheric pressure is 
14.7 psi, the barometric pressure is 29.92 "Hg, and the metric 
measurement is 1013.25 mb. 

An important consideration is that atmospheric pressure 
varies with altitude. As an aircraft ascends, atmospheric 
pressure drops, oxygen content of the air decreases, and 
temperature drops. The changes in altitude affect an aircraft’s 
performance in such areas as lift and engine horsepower. The 


2-3

effects of temperature, altitude, and density of air on aircraft 
performance are covered in the following paragraphs. 

Density
Density is weight per unit of volume. Since air is a mixture 
of gases, it can be compressed. If the air in one container is 
under half as much pressure as an equal amount of air in an 
identical container, the air under the greater pressure weighs 
twice as much as that in the container under lower pressure. 
The air under greater pressure is twice as dense as that in 
the other container. For the equal weight of air, that which 
is under the greater pressure occupies only half the volume 
of that under half the pressure.

The density of gases is governed by the following rules:

1. Density varies in direct proportion with the pressure.

2. Density varies inversely with the temperature.

Thus, air at high altitudes is less dense than air at low 
altitudes, and a mass of hot air is less dense than a mass of 
cool air. 

Changes in density affect the aerodynamic performance of 
aircraft with the same horsepower. An aircraft can fly faster at 
a high altitude where the density is low than at a low altitude 
where the density is greater. This is because air offers less 
resistance to the aircraft when it contains a smaller number 
of air particles per unit of volume. 

Humidity
Humidity is the amount of water vapor in the air. The 
maximum amount of water vapor that air can hold varies 
with the temperature. The higher the temperature of the air, 
the more water vapor it can absorb. 

1. Absolute humidity is the weight of water vapor in a 
unit volume of air.

2. Relative humidity is the ratio, in percent, of the 
moisture actually in the air to the moisture it would 
hold if it were saturated at the same temperature and 
pressure. 

Assuming that the temperature and pressure remain the same, 
the density of the air varies inversely with the humidity. On 
damp days, the air density is less than on dry days. For this 
reason, an aircraft requires a longer runway for takeoff on 
damp days than it does on dry days. 

By itself, water vapor weighs approximately five-eighths 
as much as an equal amount of perfectly dry air. Therefore, 
when air contains water vapor, it is not as heavy as dry air 
containing no moisture.

Aerodynamics and the Laws of Physics
The law of conservation of energy states that energy may 
neither be created nor destroyed.

Motion is the act or process of changing place or position. 
An object may be in motion with respect to one object and 
motionless with respect to another. For example, a person 
sitting quietly in an aircraft flying at 200 knots is at rest or 
motionless with respect to the aircraft; however, the person 
and the aircraft are in motion with respect to the air and to 
the earth.

Air has no force or power, except pressure, unless it is in 
motion. When it is moving, however, its force becomes 
apparent. A moving object in motionless air has a force 
exerted on it as a result of its own motion. It makes no 
difference in the effect then, whether an object is moving 
with respect to the air or the air is moving with respect to 
the object. The flow of air around an object caused by the 
movement of either the air or the object, or both, is called 
the relative wind. 

Velocity and Acceleration
The terms “speed” and “velocity” are often used 
interchangeably, but they do not have the same meaning. 
Speed is the rate of motion in relation to time, and velocity is 
the rate of motion in a particular direction in relation to time. 

An aircraft starts from New York City and flies 10 hours at 
an average speed of 260 miles per hour (mph). At the end of 
this time, the aircraft may be over the Atlantic Ocean, Pacific 
Ocean, Gulf of Mexico, or, if its flight were in a circular path, 
it may even be back over New York City. If this same aircraft 
flew at a velocity of 260 mph in a southwestward direction, 
it would arrive in Los Angeles in about 10 hours. Only the 
rate of motion is indicated in the first example and denotes 
the speed of the aircraft. In the last example, the particular 
direction is included with the rate of motion, thus, denoting 
the velocity of the aircraft. 

Acceleration is defined as the rate of change of velocity. 
An aircraft increasing in velocity is an example of positive 
acceleration, while another aircraft reducing its velocity is an 
example of negative acceleration, or deceleration.

Newton’s Laws of Motion
The fundamental laws governing the action of air about a 
wing are known as Newton’s laws of motion. 

Newton’s first law is normally referred to as the law of 
inertia. It simply means that a body at rest does not move 
unless force is applied to it. If a body is moving at uniform 


2-4

Same mass of air

Mass of air

Velocity increased
Pressure decreased

(Compared to original)
Normal pressure

Normal flow Increased flow Normal flow

Normal pressure

A

B

Figure 2-2. Bernoulli’s Principle.

speed in a straight line, force must be applied to increase or 
decrease the speed. 

According to Newton’s law, since air has mass, it is a body. 
When an aircraft is on the ground with its engines off, inertia 
keeps the aircraft at rest. An aircraft is moved from its state 
of rest by the thrust force created by a propeller, or by the 
expanding exhaust, or both. When an aircraft is flying at 
uniform speed in a straight line, inertia tends to keep the 
aircraft moving. Some external force is required to change 
the aircraft from its path of flight. 

Newton’s second law states that if a body moving with 
uniform speed is acted upon by an external force, the change 
of motion is proportional to the amount of the force, and 
motion takes place in the direction in which the force acts. 
This law may be stated mathematically as follows: 

 Force = mass × acceleration (F = ma)

If an aircraft is flying against a headwind, it is slowed down. 
If the wind is coming from either side of the aircraft’s 
heading, the aircraft is pushed off course unless the pilot 
takes corrective action against the wind direction. 

Newton’s third law is the law of action and reaction. This 
law states that for every action (force) there is an equal 
and opposite reaction (force). This law can be illustrated 
by the example of firing a gun. The action is the forward 
movement of the bullet while the reaction is the backward 
recoil of the gun.

The three laws of motion that have been discussed apply to 
the theory of flight. In many cases, all three laws may be 
operating on an aircraft at the same time. 

Bernoulli’s Principle and Subsonic Flow
Bernoulli’s principle states that when a fluid (air) flowing 
through a tube reaches a constriction, or narrowing, of the 
tube, the speed of the fluid flowing through that constriction 
is increased and its pressure is decreased. The cambered 
(curved) surface of an airfoil (wing) affects the airflow 
exactly as a constriction in a tube affects airflow. [Figure 2-2] 
Diagram A of Figure 2-2 illustrates the effect of air passing 
through a constriction in a tube. In Diagram B, air is flowing 
past a cambered surface, such as an airfoil, and the effect is 
similar to that of air passing through a restriction. 

As the air flows over the upper surface of an airfoil, its 
velocity increases and its pressure decreases; an area of low 
pressure is formed. There is an area of greater pressure on 
the lower surface of the airfoil, and this greater pressure 
tends to move the wing upward. The difference in pressure 
between the upper and lower surfaces of the wing is called 
lift. Three-fourths of the total lift of an airfoil is the result of 
the decrease in pressure over the upper surface. The impact 
of air on the under surface of an airfoil produces the other 
one-fourth of the total lift.

Airfoil
An airfoil is a surface designed to obtain lift from the air 
through which it moves. Thus, it can be stated that any part 
of the aircraft that converts air resistance into lift is an airfoil. 


2-5

100 mph      14.7 lb/in2 105 mph      14.67 lb/in2

115 mph      14.54 lb/in2

Figure 2-3. Airflow over a wing section. 

Chord line of wing

Longitudinal axis

Angle of incidence

Figure 2-4. Angle of incidence.

The profile of a conventional wing is an excellent example 
of an airfoil. [Figure 2-3] Notice that the top surface of the 
wing profile has greater curvature than the lower surface. 

The difference in curvature of the upper and lower surfaces 
of the wing builds up the lift force. Air flowing over the top 
surface of the wing must reach the trailing edge of the wing 
in the same amount of time as the air flowing under the wing. 
To do this, the air passing over the top surface moves at a 
greater velocity than the air passing below the wing because 
of the greater distance it must travel along the top surface. 
This increased velocity, according to Bernoulli’s Principle, 
means a corresponding decrease in pressure on the surface. 
Thus, a pressure differential is created between the upper 
and lower surfaces of the wing, forcing the wing upward in 
the direction of the lower pressure. 

Within limits, lift can be increased by increasing the angle 
of attack (AOA), wing area, velocity, density of the air, or 
by changing the shape of the airfoil. When the force of lift 
on an aircraft’s wing equals the force of gravity, the aircraft 
maintains level flight.

Shape of the Airfoil
Individual airfoil section properties differ from those 
properties of the wing or aircraft as a whole because of the 
effect of the wing planform. A wing may have various airfoil 
sections from root to tip, with taper, twist, and sweepback. 
The resulting aerodynamic properties of the wing are 
determined by the action of each section along the span. 

The shape of the airfoil determines the amount of turbulence 
or skin friction that it produces, consequently affecting the 
efficiency of the wing. Turbulence and skin friction are 
controlled mainly by the fineness ratio, which is defined as the 
ratio of the chord of the airfoil to the maximum thickness. If 
the wing has a high fineness ratio, it is a very thin wing. A thick 
wing has a low fineness ratio. A wing with a high fineness 
ratio produces a large amount of skin friction. A wing with 
a low fineness ratio produces a large amount of turbulence. 
The best wing is a compromise between these two extremes 
to hold both turbulence and skin friction to a minimum. 

The efficiency of a wing is measured in terms of the lift to 
drag ratio (L/D). This ratio varies with the AOA but reaches a 
definite maximum value for a particular AOA. At this angle, 
the wing has reached its maximum efficiency. The shape of 
the airfoil is the factor that determines the AOA at which 
the wing is most efficient; it also determines the degree of 
efficiency. Research has shown that the most efficient airfoils 
for general use have the maximum thickness occurring about 
one-third of the way back from the leading edge of the wing. 

High-lift wings and high-lift devices for wings have been 
developed by shaping the airfoils to produce the desired effect. 
The amount of lift produced by an airfoil increases with an 
increase in wing camber. Camber refers to the curvature of an 
airfoil above and below the chord line surface. Upper camber 
refers to the upper surface, lower camber to the lower surface, 
and mean camber to the mean line of the section. Camber is 
positive when departure from the chord line is outward and 
negative when it is inward. Thus, high-lift wings have a large 
positive camber on the upper surface and a slightly negative 
camber on the lower surface. Wing flaps cause an ordinary 
wing to approximate this same condition by increasing the 
upper camber and by creating a negative lower camber. 

It is also known that the larger the wingspan, as compared 
to the chord, the greater the lift obtained. This comparison 
is called aspect ratio. The higher the aspect ratio, the greater 
the lift. In spite of the benefits from an increase in aspect 
ratio, it was found that definite limitations were defined by 
structural and drag considerations. 

On the other hand, an airfoil that is perfectly streamlined 
and offers little wind resistance sometimes does not have 
enough lifting power to take the aircraft off the ground. Thus, 
modern aircraft have airfoils which strike a medium between 
extremes, the shape depending on the purposes of the aircraft 
for which it is designed.

Angle of Incidence
The acute angle the wing chord makes with the longitudinal 
axis of the aircraft is called the angle of incidence, or the angle 
of wing setting. [Figure 2-4] The angle of incidence in most 


2-6

Resultant lift

Center of pressure

Angle of attack

Relative airstream Drag

Lift
Chord line

Resultant

Center of pressurePositive pressure

Relative airstream

Negative pressure pattern

Resultant

Positive pressure

Relative airstream

Negative pressure pattern
moves forward

Resultant

Positive pressure

Relative airstream

Center of pressure
moves forward

Positive pressure

Wing completely stalled

Angle of attack = 0°A

Angle of attack = 6°B

Angle of attack = 12°C

Angle of attack = 18°D

Figure 2-6. Effect on increasing angle of attack. 

Figure 2-5. Airflow over a wing section. 

cases is a fixed, built-in angle. When the leading edge of the 
wing is higher than the trailing edge, the angle of incidence is 
said to be positive. The angle of incidence is negative when 
the leading edge is lower than the trailing edge of the wing.

Angle of Attack (AOA)
Before beginning the discussion on AOA and its effect on 
airfoils, first consider the terms chord and center of pressure 
(CP) as illustrated in Figure 2-5.

The chord of an airfoil or wing section is an imaginary 
straight line that passes through the section from the leading 
edge to the trailing edge, as shown in Figure 2-5. The chord 
line provides one side of an angle that ultimately forms 
the AOA. The other side of the angle is formed by a line 
indicating the direction of the relative airstream. Thus, AOA 
is defined as the angle between the chord line of the wing and 
the direction of the relative wind. This is not to be confused 
with the angle of incidence, illustrated in Figure 2-4, which 
is the angle between the chord line of the wing and the 
longitudinal axis of the aircraft. 

On each part of an airfoil or wing surface, a small force is 
present. This force is of a different magnitude and direction 
from any forces acting on other areas forward or rearward 
from this point. It is possible to add all of these small forces 
mathematically. That sum is called the “resultant force” 
(lift). This resultant force has magnitude, direction, and 
location, and can be represented as a vector, as shown in 
Figure 2-5. The point of intersection of the resultant force 
line with the chord line of the airfoil is called the center of 
pressure (CP). The CP moves along the airfoil chord as the 
AOA changes. Throughout most of the flight range, the CP 
moves forward with increasing AOA and rearward as the 
AOA decreases. The effect of increasing AOA on the CP is 
shown in Figure 2-6. 

The AOA changes as the aircraft’s attitude changes. Since the 
AOA has a great deal to do with determining lift, it is given 
primary consideration when designing airfoils. In a properly 
designed airfoil, the lift increases as the AOA is increased. 

When the AOA is increased gradually toward a positive 
AOA, the lift component increases rapidly up to a certain 
point and then suddenly begins to drop off. During this action 
the drag component increases slowly at first, then rapidly as 
lift begins to drop off. 

When the AOA increases to the angle of maximum lift, the 
burble point is reached. This is known as the critical angle. 
When the critical angle is reached, the air ceases to flow 
smoothly over the top surface of the airfoil and begins to 
burble or eddy. This means that air breaks away from the 
upper camber line of the wing. What was formerly the area 
of decreased pressure is now filled by this burbling air. 
When this occurs, the amount of lift drops and drag becomes 


2-7

Lift
W

eight

Drag

Thrust

Figure 2-7. Forces in action during flight.

Drag

Lift

Resultant

Figure 2-8. Resultant of lift and drag. 

excessive. The force of gravity exerts itself, and the nose of 
the aircraft drops. This is a stall. Thus, the burble point is 
the stalling angle. 

As previously seen, the distribution of the pressure forces 
over the airfoil varies with the AOA. The application of the 
resultant force, or CP, varies correspondingly. As this angle 
increases, the CP moves forward; as the angle decreases, the 
CP moves back. The unstable travel of the CP is characteristic 
of almost all airfoils.

Boundary Layer
In the study of physics and fluid mechanics, a boundary layer 
is that layer of fluid in the immediate vicinity of a bounding 
surface. In relation to an aircraft, the boundary layer is the 
part of the airflow closest to the surface of the aircraft. In 
designing high-performance aircraft, considerable attention 
is paid to controlling the behavior of the boundary layer to 
minimize pressure drag and skin friction drag. 
 
Thrust and Drag
An aircraft in flight is the center of a continuous battle of 
forces. Actually, this conflict is not as violent as it sounds, 
but it is the key to all maneuvers performed in the air. There 
is nothing mysterious about these forces; they are definite and 
known. The directions in which they act can be calculated, 
and the aircraft itself is designed to take advantage of each 
of them. In all types of flying, flight calculations are based 
on the magnitude and direction of four forces: weight, lift, 
drag, and thrust. [Figure 2-7]

An aircraft in flight is acted upon by four forces:

1. Gravity or weight—the force that pulls the aircraft 
toward the earth. Weight is the force of gravity acting 
downward upon everything that goes into the aircraft, 
such as the aircraft itself, crew, fuel, and cargo. 

2. Lift—the force that pushes the aircraft upward. Lift 
acts vertically and counteracts the effects of weight. 

3. Thrust—the force that moves the aircraft forward. 
Thrust is the forward force produced by the powerplant 
that overcomes the force of drag.

4. Drag—the force that exerts a braking action to hold 
the aircraft back. Drag is a backward deterrent force 
and is caused by the disruption of the airflow by the 
wings, fuselage, and protruding objects. 

These four forces are in perfect balance only when the aircraft 
is in straight-and-level unaccelerated flight. 

The forces of lift and drag are the direct result of the 
relationship between the relative wind and the aircraft. The 
force of lift always acts perpendicular to the relative wind, 
and the force of drag always acts parallel to and in the same 
direction as the relative wind. These forces are actually the 
components that produce a resultant lift force on the wing. 
[Figure 2-8]

Weight has a definite relationship with lift, and thrust with 
drag. These relationships are quite simple, but very important 
in understanding the aerodynamics of flying. As stated 
previously, lift is the upward force on the wing perpendicular 
to the relative wind. Lift is required to counteract the aircraft’s 
weight, caused by the force of gravity acting on the mass of 
the aircraft. This weight force acts downward through a point 
called the center of gravity (CG). The CG is the point at which 
all the weight of the aircraft is considered to be concentrated. 
When the lift force is in equilibrium with the weight force, 
the aircraft neither gains nor loses altitude. If lift becomes 
less than weight, the aircraft loses altitude. When the lift is 
greater than the weight, the aircraft gains altitude. 

Wing area is measured in square feet and includes the 
part blanked out by the fuselage. Wing area is adequately 
described as the area of the shadow cast by the wing at high 
noon. Tests show that lift and drag forces acting on a wing 
are roughly proportional to the wing area. This means that 


2-8

Vor
tex

Figure 2-9. Wingtip vortices. 

if the wing area is doubled, all other variables remaining the 
same, the lift and drag created by the wing is doubled. If the 
area is tripled, lift and drag are tripled.

Drag must be overcome for the aircraft to move, and 
movement is essential to obtain lift. To overcome drag and 
move the aircraft forward, another force is essential. This 
force is thrust. Thrust is derived from jet propulsion or from 
a propeller and engine combination. Jet propulsion theory is 
based on Newton’s third law of motion (page 2-4). The turbine 
engine causes a mass of air to be moved backward at high 
velocity causing a reaction that moves the aircraft forward. 

In a propeller/engine combination, the propeller is actually 
two or more revolving airfoils mounted on a horizontal shaft. 
The motion of the blades through the air produces lift similar 
to the lift on the wing, but acts in a horizontal direction, 
pulling the aircraft forward. 

Before the aircraft begins to move, thrust must be exerted. 
The aircraft continues to move and gain speed until thrust and 
drag are equal. In order to maintain a steady speed, thrust and 
drag must remain equal, just as lift and weight must be equal 
for steady, horizontal flight. Increasing the lift means that the 
aircraft moves upward, whereas decreasing the lift so that it 
is less than the weight causes the aircraft to lose altitude. A 
similar rule applies to the two forces of thrust and drag. If 
the revolutions per minute (rpm) of the engine is reduced, the 
thrust is lessened, and the aircraft slows down. As long as the 
thrust is less than the drag, the aircraft travels more and more 
slowly until its speed is insufficient to support it in the air. 

Likewise, if the rpm of the engine is increased, thrust becomes 
greater than drag, and the speed of the aircraft increases. As 
long as the thrust continues to be greater than the drag, the 
aircraft continues to accelerate. When drag equals thrust, the 
aircraft flies at a steady speed. 

The relative motion of the air over an object that produces 
lift also produces drag. Drag is the resistance of the air to 
objects moving through it. If an aircraft is flying on a level 
course, the lift force acts vertically to support it while the 
drag force acts horizontally to hold it back. The total amount 
of drag on an aircraft is made up of many drag forces, but 
this handbook considers three: parasite drag, profile drag, 
and induced drag. 

Parasite drag is made up of a combination of many different 
drag forces. Any exposed object on an aircraft offers some 
resistance to the air, and the more objects in the airstream, 
the more parasite drag. While parasite drag can be reduced 
by reducing the number of exposed parts to as few as 
practical and streamlining their shape, skin friction is the 

type of parasite drag most difficult to reduce. No surface is 
perfectly smooth. Even machined surfaces have a ragged 
uneven appearance when inspected under magnification. 
These ragged surfaces deflect the air near the surface causing 
resistance to smooth airflow. Skin friction can be reduced 
by using glossy smooth finishes and eliminating protruding 
rivet heads, roughness, and other irregularities.

Profile drag may be considered the parasite drag of the airfoil. 
The various components of parasite drag are all of the same 
nature as profile drag. 

The action of the airfoil that creates lift also causes induced 
drag. Remember, the pressure above the wing is less than 
atmospheric pressure, and the pressure below the wing is 
equal to or greater than atmospheric pressure. Since fluids 
always move from high pressure toward low pressure, there 
is a spanwise movement of air from the bottom of the wing 
outward from the fuselage and upward around the wing tip. 
This flow of air results in spillage over the wing tip, thereby 
setting up a whirlpool of air called a “vortex.” [Figure 2-9] 

The air on the upper surface has a tendency to move in toward 
the fuselage and off the trailing edge. This air current forms a 
similar vortex at the inner portion of the trailing edge of the 
wing. These vortices increase drag because of the turbulence 
produced, and constitute induced drag. 

Just as lift increases with an increase in AOA, induced drag 
also increases as the AOA becomes greater. This occurs 
because, as the AOA is increased, the pressure difference 
between the top and bottom of the wing becomes greater. 
This causes more violent vortices to be set up, resulting in 
more turbulence and more induced drag. 


2-9

Center of Gravity (CG)
Gravity is the pulling force that tends to draw all bodies 
within the earth’s gravitational field to the center of the 
earth. The CG may be considered the point at which all the 
weight of the aircraft is concentrated. If the aircraft were 
supported at its exact CG, it would balance in any position. 
CG is of major importance in an aircraft, for its position has 
a great bearing upon stability. 

The CG is determined by the general design of the aircraft. 
The designers estimate how far the CP travels. They then 
fix the CG in front of the CP for the corresponding flight 
speed in order to provide an adequate restoring moment for 
flight equilibrium. 

The Axes of an Aircraft 
Whenever an aircraft changes its attitude in flight, it must 
turn about one or more of three axes. Figure 2-10 shows the 
three axes, which are imaginary lines passing through the 
center of the aircraft. 

The axes of an aircraft can be considered as imaginary axles 
around which the aircraft turns like a wheel. At the center, 
where all three axes intersect, each is perpendicular to the 
other two. The axis that extends lengthwise through the 
fuselage from the nose to the tail is called the longitudinal 
axis. The axis that extends crosswise from wing tip to wing 
tip is the lateral, or pitch, axis. The axis that passes through 
the center, from top to bottom, is called the vertical, or yaw, 
axis. Roll, pitch, and yaw are controlled by three control 
surfaces. Roll is produced by the ailerons, which are located 
at the trailing edges of the wings. Pitch is affected by the 
elevators, the rear portion of the horizontal tail assembly. 
Yaw is controlled by the rudder, the rear portion of the 
vertical tail assembly. 

Stability and Control 
An aircraft must have sufficient stability to maintain a 
uniform flightpath and recover from the various upsetting 
forces. Also, to achieve the best performance, the aircraft 
must have the proper response to the movement of the 
controls. Control is the pilot action of moving the flight 
controls, providing the aerodynamic force that induces the 
aircraft to follow a desired flightpath. When an aircraft is 
said to be controllable, it means that the aircraft responds 
easily and promptly to movement of the controls. Different 
control surfaces are used to control the aircraft about each 
of the three axes. Moving the control surfaces on an aircraft 
changes the airflow over the aircraft’s surface. This, in turn, 
creates changes in the balance of forces acting to keep the 
aircraft flying straight and level.

Three terms that appear in any discussion of stability and 
control are: stability, maneuverability, and controllability. 
Stability is the characteristic of an aircraft that tends to 
cause it to fly (hands off) in a straight-and-level flightpath. 
Maneuverability is the characteristic of an aircraft to be 
directed along a desired flightpath and to withstand the 
stresses imposed. Controllability is the quality of the response 
of an aircraft to the pilot’s commands while maneuvering 
the aircraft. 

Static Stability
An aircraft is in a state of equilibrium when the sum of all the 
forces acting on the aircraft and all the moments is equal to 
zero. An aircraft in equilibrium experiences no accelerations, 
and the aircraft continues in a steady condition of flight. 
A gust of wind or a deflection of the controls disturbs the 
equilibrium, and the aircraft experiences acceleration due to 
the unbalance of moment or force. 

The three types of static stability are defined by the character 
of movement following some disturbance from equilibrium. 
Positive static stability exists when the disturbed object tends 
to return to equilibrium. Negative static stability, or static 
instability, exists when the disturbed object tends to continue 
in the direction of disturbance. Neutral static stability exists 
when the disturbed object has neither tendency, but remains 
in equilibrium in the direction of disturbance. These three 
types of stability are illustrated in Figure 2-11. 

Dynamic Stability
While static stability deals with the tendency of a displaced 
body to return to equilibrium, dynamic stability deals with 
the resulting motion with time. If an object is disturbed from 
equilibrium, the time history of the resulting motion defines 
the dynamic stability of the object. In general, an object 
demonstrates positive dynamic stability if the amplitude 
of motion decreases with time. If the amplitude of motion 
increases with time, the object is said to possess dynamic 
instability. 

Any aircraft must demonstrate the required degrees of static 
and dynamic stability. If an aircraft were designed with static 
instability and a rapid rate of dynamic instability, the aircraft 
would be very difficult, if not impossible, to fly. Usually, 
positive dynamic stability is required in an aircraft design to 
prevent objectionable continued oscillations of the aircraft. 

Longitudinal Stability
When an aircraft has a tendency to keep a constant AOA 
with reference to the relative wind (i.e., it does not tend to 
put its nose down and dive or lift its nose and stall); it is said 
to have longitudinal stability. Longitudinal stability refers 


2-10

Banking (roll) control affected by aileron movement A

Directional (yaw) control affected by rudder movement CClimb and dive (pitch) control affected by elevator  
movement 

B

Normal altitude

Longitudinal axis

Longitudinal axis

Lateral axis

Normal altitude

Lateral axis

Vertical axis

Normal altitude

Aileron

Rudder

Elevator
Aileron

Vertical axis

Figure 2-10. Motion of an aircraft about its axes. 

to motion in pitch. The horizontal stabilizer is the primary 
surface which controls longitudinal stability. The action of 
the stabilizer depends upon the speed and AOA of the aircraft. 

Directional Stability
Stability about the vertical axis is referred to as directional 
stability. The aircraft should be designed so that when it is 


2-11

Positive static stability Neutral static stability Negative static stability

C
G

C
G

C
G

C
G

Applied
force

Applied
force

Applied
force

Figure 2-11. Three types of stability.

Trim tabs

Figure 2-12. Trim tabs.

in straight-and-level flight it remains on its course heading 
even though the pilot takes his or her hands and feet off the 
controls. If an aircraft recovers automatically from a skid, it 
has been well designed for directional balance. The vertical 
stabilizer is the primary surface that controls directional 
stability. Directional stability can be designed into an aircraft, 
where appropriate, by using a large dorsal fin, a long fuselage, 
and sweptback wings. 

Lateral Stability
Motion about the aircraft’s longitudinal (fore and aft) axis 
is a lateral, or rolling, motion. The tendency to return to the 
original attitude from such motion is called lateral stability. 

Dutch Roll
A Dutch Roll is an aircraft motion consisting of an out-of-
phase combination of yaw and roll. Dutch roll stability can 
be artificially increased by the installation of a yaw damper. 

Primary Flight Controls
The primary controls are the ailerons, elevator, and the 
rudder, which provide the aerodynamic force to make the 
aircraft follow a desired flightpath. [Figure 2-10] The flight 
control surfaces are hinged or movable airfoils designed to 
change the attitude of the aircraft by changing the airflow 
over the aircraft’s surface during flight. These surfaces are 
used for moving the aircraft about its three axes.

Typically, the ailerons and elevators are operated from the 
flight deck by means of a control stick, a wheel, and yoke 
assembly and on some of the newer design aircraft, a joy-

stick. The rudder is normally operated by foot pedals on most 
aircraft. Lateral control is the banking movement or roll of an 
aircraft that is controlled by the ailerons. Longitudinal control 
is the climb and dive movement or pitch of an aircraft that 
is controlled by the elevator. Directional control is the left 
and right movement or yaw of an aircraft that is controlled 
by the rudder. 

Trim Controls
Included in the trim controls are the trim tabs, servo tabs, 
balance tabs, and spring tabs. Trim tabs are small airfoils 
recessed into the trailing edges of the primary control 
surfaces. [Figure 2-12] Trim tabs can be used to correct any 
tendency of the aircraft to move toward an undesirable flight 


2-12

Trim tab

Servo tab

Balance tab

Spring tab

Fixed surface

Control horn

Horn free to pivot on hinge axis

Control horn

Spring cartridge

Control surface

Control horn

Tab

Figure 2-13. Types of trim tabs.

attitude. Their purpose is to enable the pilot to trim out any 
unbalanced condition which may exist during flight, without 
exerting any pressure on the primary controls.

Servo tabs, sometimes referred to as flight tabs, are used 
primarily on the large main control surfaces. They aid in 
moving the main control surface and holding it in the desired 
position. Only the servo tab moves in response to movement 
by the pilot of the primary flight controls. 

Balance tabs are designed to move in the opposite direction 
of the primary flight control. Thus, aerodynamic forces acting 
on the tab assist in moving the primary control surface.

Spring tabs are similar in appearance to trim tabs, but serve an 
entirely different purpose. Spring tabs are used for the same 
purpose as hydraulic actuators—to aid the pilot in moving 
the primary control surface. 

Figure 2-13 indicates how each trim tab is hinged to its parent 
primary control surface, but is operated by an independent 
control.

Auxiliary Lift Devices
Included in the auxiliary lift devices group of flight control 
surfaces are the wing flaps, spoilers, speed brakes, slats, 
leading edge flaps, and slots. 

The auxiliary groups may be divided into two subgroups: 
those whose primary purpose is lift augmenting and those 
whose primary purpose is lift decreasing. In the first group are 
the flaps, both trailing edge and leading edge (slats), and slots. 
The lift decreasing devices are speed brakes and spoilers. 

Lift Augmenting
Flaps are located on the trailing edge of the wing and are 
moveable to increase the wing area, thereby increasing lift 
on takeoff, and decreasing the speed during landing. These 
airfoils are retractable and fair into the wing contour. Others 
are simply a portion of the lower skin which extends into 
the airstream, thereby slowing the aircraft. Leading edge 
flaps, also referred to as slats, are airfoils extended from and 
retracted into the leading edge of the wing.  Some installations
create a slot (an opening between the extended airfoil and the
leading edge). [Figure 2-14] At low airspeeds, this slot 
increases lift and improves handling characteristics, allowing 
the aircraft to be controlled at airspeeds below the normal 
landing speed.  

Other installations have permanent slots built in the leading
edge of the wing. At cruising speeds, the trailing edge and 
leading edge flaps (slats) are retracted into the wing proper. 
Slats are movable control surfaces attached to the leading 

edges of the wings. When the slat is closed, it forms the 
leading edge of the wing. When in the open position (extended 
forward), a slot is created between the slat and the wing 
leading edge. At low airspeeds, this increases lift and improves 
handling characteristics, allowing the aircraft to be controlled 
at airspeeds below the normal landing  speed. [Figure 2-15]

Lift Decreasing
Lift decreasing devices are the speed brakes (spoilers). In 
some installations, there are two types of spoilers. The ground 
spoiler is extended only after the aircraft is on the ground, 
thereby assisting in the braking action. The flight spoiler 
assists in lateral control by being extended whenever the 
aileron on that wing is rotated up. When actuated as speed 
brakes, the spoiler panels on both wings raise up. In-flight 
spoilers may also be located along the sides, underneath the 
fuselage, or back at the tail. [Figure 2-16] In some aircraft 
designs, the wing panel on the up aileron side rises more than 


2-13

Plain flap

Basic section

Split flap

Slotted flap

Fowler flap

Slotted Fowler flap

Fixed slot

Automatic slot

Slat

Figure 2-15. Wing slots.

Figure 2-14. Types of wing flaps.

Figure 2-16. Speed brake.

Figure 2-17. Winglets on a Bombardier Learjet 60.

the wing panel on the down aileron side. This provides speed 
brake operation and lateral control simultaneously. 

Winglets
Winglets are the near-vertical extension of the wingtip 
that reduces the aerodynamic drag associated with vortices 
that develop at the wingtips as the airplane moves through 
the air. By reducing the induced drag at the tips of the 
wings, fuel consumption goes down and range is extended. 
Figure 2-17 shows an example of a Learjet 60 with winglets.

Canard Wings
A canard wing aircraft is an airframe configuration of a fixed-
wing aircraft in which a small wing or horizontal airfoil is 
ahead of the main lifting surfaces, rather than behind them as 
in a conventional aircraft. The canard may be fixed, movable, 
or designed with elevators. Good examples of aircraft with 
canard wings are the Rutan VariEze and Beechcraft 2000 
Starship. [Figures 2-18 and 2-19]


2-14

Figure 2-20. Aircraft stall fence.

Figure 2-19. The Beechcraft 2000 Starship has canard wings.

Figure 2-18. Canard wings on a Rutan VariEze.

Wing Fences 
Wing fences are flat metal vertical plates fixed to the upper 
surface of the wing. They obstruct spanwise airflow along 
the wing, and prevent the entire wing from stalling at once. 
They are often attached on swept-wing aircraft to prevent the 
spanwise movement of air at high AOA. Their purpose is to 
provide better slow speed handling and stall characteristics. 
[Figure 2-20] 
  
Control Systems for Large Aircraft
Mechanical Control
This is the basic type of system that was used to control 
early aircraft and is currently used in smaller aircraft where 
aerodynamic forces are not excessive. The controls are 
mechanical and manually operated.

The mechanical system of controlling an aircraft can include 
cables, push-pull tubes, and torque tubes. The cable system is 
the most widely used because deflections of the structure to 
which it is attached do not affect its operation. Some aircraft 
incorporate control systems that are a combination of all three. 

These systems incorporate cable assemblies, cable guides, 
linkage, adjustable stops, and control surface snubber or 
mechanical locking devices. These surface locking devices, 
usually referred to as a gust lock, limits the external wind forces 
from damaging the aircraft while it is parked or tied down. 

Hydromechanical Control
As the size, complexity, and speed of aircraft increased, 
actuation of controls in flight became more difficult. It soon 
became apparent that the pilot needed assistance to overcome 
the aerodynamic forces to control aircraft movement. Spring 
tabs, which were operated by the conventional control 
system, were moved so that the airflow over them actually 
moved the primary control surface. This was sufficient 
for the aircraft operating in the lowest of the high speed 
ranges (250–300 mph). For higher speeds, a power-assisted 
(hydraulic) control system was designed.

Conventional cable or push-pull tube systems link the 
flight deck controls with the hydraulic system. With the 
system activated, the pilot’s movement of a control causes 
the mechanical link to open servo valves, thereby directing 
hydraulic fluid to actuators, which convert hydraulic pressure 
into control surface movements.

Because of the efficiency of the hydromechanical flight 
control system, the aerodynamic forces on the control surfaces 
cannot be felt by the pilot, and there is a risk of overstressing 
the structure of the aircraft. To overcome this problem, 
aircraft designers incorporated artificial feel systems into the 
design that provided increased resistance to the controls at 
higher speeds. Additionally, some aircraft with hydraulically 
powered control systems are fitted with a device called a stick 
shaker, which provides an artificial stall warning to the pilot. 

Fly-By-Wire Control 
The fly-by-wire (FBW) control system employs electrical 
signals that transmit the pilot’s actions from the flight deck 


2-15

Figure 2-21. Breaking the sound barrier. 

through a computer to the various flight control actuators. 
The FBW system evolved as a way to reduce the system 
weight of the hydromechanical system, reduce maintenance 
costs, and improve reliability. Electronic FBW control 
systems can respond to changing aerodynamic conditions 
by adjusting flight control movements so that the aircraft 
response is consistent for all flight conditions. Additionally, 
the computers can be programmed to prevent undesirable 
and dangerous characteristics, such as stalling and spinning.

Many of the new military high-performance aircraft are not 
aerodynamically stable. This characteristic is designed into 
the aircraft for increased maneuverability and responsive 
performance. Without the computers reacting to the 
instability, the pilot would lose control of the aircraft. 

The Airbus A-320 was the first commercial airliner to use 
FBW controls. Boeing used them in their 777 and newer 
design commercial aircraft. The Dassault Falcon 7X was the 
first business jet to use a FBW control system.

High-Speed Aerodynamics
High-speed aerodynamics, often called compressible 
aerodynamics, is a special branch of study of aeronautics. 
It is utilized by aircraft designers when designing aircraft 
capable of speeds approaching Mach 1 and above. Because 
it is beyond the scope and intent of this handbook, only a 
brief overview of the subject is provided.

In the study of high-speed aeronautics, the compressibility 
effects on air must be addressed. This flight regime is 
characterized by the Mach number, a special parameter named 
in honor of Ernst Mach, the late 19th century physicist who 
studied gas dynamics. Mach number is the ratio of the speed 
of the aircraft to the local speed of sound and determines the 
magnitude of many of the compressibility effects. 

As an aircraft moves through the air, the air molecules near 
the aircraft are disturbed and move around the aircraft. The 
air molecules are pushed aside much like a boat creates a bow 
wave as it moves through the water. If the aircraft passes at a 
low speed, typically less than 250 mph, the density of the air 
remains constant. But at higher speeds, some of the energy of 
the aircraft goes into compressing the air and locally changing 
the density of the air. The bigger and heavier the aircraft, the 
more air it displaces and the greater effect compression has 
on the aircraft. 

This effect becomes more important as speed increases. Near 
and beyond the speed of sound, about 760 mph (at sea level), 
sharp disturbances generate a shockwave that affects both the 
lift and drag of an aircraft and flow conditions downstream of 
the shockwave. The shockwave forms a cone of pressurized 

air molecules which move outward and rearward in all 
directions and extend to the ground. The sharp release of the 
pressure, after the buildup by the shockwave, is heard as the 
sonic boom. [Figure 2-21]

Listed below are a range of conditions that are encountered 
by aircraft as their designed speed increases. 

• Subsonic conditions occur for Mach numbers less 
than one (100–350 mph). For the lowest subsonic 
conditions, compressibility can be ignored.

• As the speed of the object approaches the speed of 
sound, the flight Mach number is nearly equal to 
one, M = 1 (350–760 mph), and the flow is said 
to be transonic. At some locations on the object, 
the local speed of air exceeds the speed of sound. 
Compressibility effects are most important in 
transonic flows and lead to the early belief in a sound 
barrier. Flight faster than sound was thought to be 
impossible. In fact, the sound barrier was only an 
increase in the drag near sonic conditions because 
of compressibility effects. Because of the high drag 
associated with compressibility effects, aircraft are 
not operated in cruise conditions near Mach 1. 

• Supersonic conditions occur for numbers greater 
than Mach 1, but less then Mach 3 (760–2,280 
mph). Compressibility effects of gas are important 
in the design of supersonic aircraft because of the 
shockwaves that are generated by the surface of the 
object. For high supersonic speeds, between Mach 3 
and Mach 5 (2,280–3,600 mph), aerodynamic heating 
becomes a very important factor in aircraft design. 

• For speeds greater than Mach 5, the flow is said to 
be hypersonic. At these speeds, some of the energy 
of the object now goes into exciting the chemical 
bonds which hold together the nitrogen and oxygen 
molecules of the air. At hypersonic speeds, the 


2-16

Pedals

   Maintain heading

 Cyclic control stick

   Controls attitude and direction of flight

Collective pitch stick

   Controls altitude

Throttle

    Controls rpm

Figure 2-22. Controls of a helicopter and the principal function of each. 

chemistry of the air must be considered when 
determining forces on the object. When the space 
shuttle re-enters the atmosphere at high hypersonic 
speeds, close to Mach 25, the heated air becomes an 
ionized plasma of gas, and the spacecraft must be 
insulated from the extremely high temperatures. 

Additional technical information pertaining to high-speed 
aerodynamics can be found at bookstores, libraries, and 
numerous sources on the Internet. As the design of aircraft 
evolves and the speeds of aircraft continue to increase into 
the hypersonic range, new materials and propulsion systems 
will need to be developed. This is the challenge for engineers, 
physicists, and designers of aircraft in the future. 

Rotary-Wing Aircraft Assembly and Rigging
The flight control units located in the flight deck of all 
helicopters are very nearly the same. All helicopters have 
either one or two of each of the following: collective pitch 
control, throttle grip, cyclic pitch control, and directional 
control pedals. [Figure 2-22] Basically, these units do the 
same things, regardless of the type of helicopter on which 
they are installed; however, the operation of the control 
system varies greatly by helicopter model. 

Rigging the helicopter coordinates the movements of the 
flight controls and establishes the relationship between the 
main rotor and its controls, and between the tail rotor and its 
controls. Rigging is not a difficult job, but it requires great 
precision and attention to detail. Strict adherence to rigging 
procedures described in the manufacturer’s maintenance 
manuals and service instructions is a must. Adjustments, 
clearances, and tolerances must be exact. 

Rigging of the various flight control systems can be broken 
down into the following three major steps: 

1. Placing the control system in a specific position—
holding it in position with pins, clamps, or jigs, then 
adjusting the various linkages to fit the immobilized 
control component. 

2. Placing the control surfaces in a specific reference 
position—using a rigging jig, a precision bubble 
protractor, or a spirit level to check the angular 
difference between the control surface and some fixed 
surface on the aircraft. [Figure 2-23]

3. Setting the maximum range of travel of the various 
components—this adjustment limits the physical 
movement of the control system.


2-17

Main rotor rigging protractor

25°

20°

15°

10°

5°

0°

CAUTION
Make sure blade

dampers are 
positioned against

auto-rotation
inboard stops

15°

10°

5°

Figure 2-23. A typical rigging protractor. 

Figure 2-24. An autogyro.

Figure 2-25. Single rotor helicopter.

After completion of the static rigging, a functional check of 
the flight control system must be accomplished. The nature 
of the functional check varies with the type of helicopter and 
system concerned, but usually includes determining that: 

1. The direction of movement of the main and tail rotor 
blades is correct in relation to movement of the pilot’s 
controls. 

2. The operation of interconnected control systems 
(engine throttle and collective pitch) is properly 
coordinated. 

3. The range of movement and neutral position of the 
pilot’s controls are correct. 

4. The maximum and minimum pitch angles of the main 
rotor blades are within specified limits. This includes 
checking the fore-and-aft and lateral cyclic pitch and 
collective pitch blade angles. 

5. The tracking of the main rotor blades is correct. 

6. In the case of multirotor aircraft, the rigging and 
movement of the rotor blades are synchronized.

7. When tabs are provided on main rotor blades, they 
are correctly set. 

8. The neutral, maximum, and minimum pitch angles 
and coning angles of the tail rotor blades are correct. 

9. When dual controls are provided, they function 
correctly and in synchronization. 

Upon completion of rigging, a thorough check should be made 
of all attaching, securing, and pivot points. All bolts, nuts, and 
rod ends should be properly secured and safetied as specified 
in the manufacturers’ maintenance and service instructions.

Configurations of Rotary-Wing Aircraft
Autogyro
An autogyro is an aircraft with a free-spinning horizontal 
rotor that turns due to passage of air upward through the 
rotor. This air motion is created from forward motion of the 
aircraft resulting from either a tractor or pusher configured 
engine/propeller design. [Figure 2-24]

Single Rotor Helicopter
An aircraft with a single horizontal main rotor that provides 
both lift and direction of travel is a single rotor helicopter. 
A secondary rotor mounted vertically on the tail counteracts 
the rotational force (torque) of the main rotor to correct yaw 
of the fuselage. [Figure 2-25] 


2-18

Pitch change axis

Drag hingeFlipping hinge

Figure 2-27. Articulated rotor head.

Figure 2-26. Dual rotor helicopter.

Dual Rotor Helicopter
An aircraft with two horizontal rotors that provide both the 
lift and directional control is a dual rotor helicopter. The 
rotors are counterrotating to balance the aerodynamic torque 
and eliminate the need for a separate antitorque system. 
[Figure 2-26]

Types of Rotor Systems
Fully Articulated Rotor
A fully articulated rotor is found on aircraft with more than 
two blades and allows movement of each individual blade in 
three directions. In this design, each blade can rotate about 
the pitch axis to change lift; each blade can move back and 
forth in plane, lead and lag; and flap up and down through a 
hinge independent of the other blades. [Figure 2-27] 

Semirigid Rotor
The semirigid rotor design is found on aircraft with two rotor 
blades. The blades are connected in a manner such that as 
one blade flaps up, the opposite blade flaps down.

Rigid Rotor
The rigid rotor system is a rare design but potentially offers 
the best properties of both the fully articulated and semirigid 
rotors. In this design, the blade roots are rigidly attached to the 
rotor hub. The blades do not have hinges to allow lead-lag or 
flapping. Instead, the blades accommodate these motions by 
using elastomeric bearings. Elastomeric bearings are molded, 
rubber-like materials that are bonded to the appropriate parts. 
Instead of rotating like conventional bearings, they twist and 
flex to allow proper movement of the blades. 

Forces Acting on the Helicopter
One of the differences between a helicopter and a fixed-wing 
aircraft is the main source of lift. The fixed-wing aircraft 
derives its lift from a fixed airfoil surface while the helicopter 
derives lift from a rotating airfoil called the rotor. 

During hovering flight in a no-wind condition, the tip-path 
plane is horizontal, that is, parallel to the ground. Lift and 
thrust act straight up; weight and drag act straight down. The 
sum of the lift and thrust forces must equal the sum of the 
weight and drag forces in order for the helicopter to hover. 

During vertical flight in a no-wind condition, the lift and 
thrust forces both act vertically upward. Weight and drag both 
act vertically downward. When lift and thrust equal weight 
and drag, the helicopter hovers; if lift and thrust are less than 
weight and drag, the helicopter descends vertically; if lift 
and thrust are greater than weight and drag, the helicopter 
rises vertically. 

For forward flight, the tip-path plane is tilted forward, thus 
tilting the total lift-thrust force forward from the vertical. This 
resultant lift-thrust force can be resolved into two components: 
lift acting vertically upward and thrust acting horizontally in 
the direction of flight. In addition to lift and thrust, there is 
weight, the downward acting force, and drag, the rearward 
acting or retarding force of inertia and wind resistance. 

In straight-and-level, unaccelerated forward flight, lift equals 
weight and thrust equals drag. (Straight-and-level flight is 
flight with a constant heading and at a constant altitude.) 
If lift exceeds weight, the helicopter climbs; if lift is less 
than weight, the helicopter descends. If thrust exceeds drag, 
the helicopter increases speed; if thrust is less than drag, it 
decreases speed.


2-19

Figure 2-28. Aerospatiale Fenestron tail rotor system (left) and the McDonnell Douglas NOTAR® System (right).

In sideward flight, the tip-path plane is tilted sideward in the 
direction that flight is desired, thus tilting the total lift-thrust 
vector sideward. In this case, the vertical or lift component 
is still straight up, weight straight down, but the horizontal 
or thrust component now acts sideward with drag acting to 
the opposite side. 

For rearward flight, the tip-path plane is tilted rearward and 
tilts the lift-thrust vector rearward. The thrust is then rearward 
and the drag component is forward, opposite that for forward 
flight. The lift component in rearward flight is straight up; 
weight, straight down. 

Torque Compensation
Newton’s third law of motion states “To every action there 
is an equal and opposite reaction.” As the main rotor of a 
helicopter turns in one direction, the fuselage tends to rotate 
in the opposite direction. This tendency for the fuselage to 
rotate is called torque. Since torque effect on the fuselage is 
a direct result of engine power supplied to the main rotor, 
any change in engine power brings about a corresponding 
change in torque effect. The greater the engine power, the 
greater the torque effect. Since there is no engine power 
being supplied to the main rotor during autorotation, there 
is no torque reaction during autorotation. 

The force that compensates for torque and provides for 
directional control can be produced by various means. The 
defining factor is dictated by the design of the helicopter, 
some of which do not have a torque issue. Single main 

rotor designs typically have an auxiliary rotor located on 
the end of the tail boom. This auxiliary rotor, generally 
referred to as a tail rotor, produces thrust in the direction 
opposite the torque reaction developed by the main rotor. 
[Figure 2-25] Foot pedals in the flight deck permit the 
pilot to increase or decrease tail rotor thrust, as needed, to 
neutralize torque effect. 

Other methods of compensating for torque and providing 
directional control include the Fenestron® tail rotor system, 
an SUD Aviation design that employs a ducted fan enclosed 
by a shroud. Another design, called NOTAR®, a McDonald 
Douglas design with no tail rotor, employs air directed 
through a series of slots in the tail boom, with the balance 
exiting through a 90° duct located at the rear of the tail boom. 
[Figure 2-28]

Gyroscopic Forces
The spinning main rotor of a helicopter acts like a gyroscope. 
As such, it has the properties of gyroscopic action, one of 
which is precession. Gyroscopic precession is the resultant 
action or deflection of a spinning object when a force is 
applied to this object. This action occurs approximately 90° 
in the direction of rotation from the point where the force 
is applied. [Figure 2-29] Through the use of this principle, 
the tip-path plane of the main rotor may be tilted from the 
horizontal. 


2-20

90

Old axisNew axisAxis

Gyro tips up hereUpward force applied here Reaction occurs here Gyro tips down here

Figure 2-29. Gyroscopic precession principle.

Examine a two-bladed rotor system to see how gyroscopic 
precession affects the movement of the tip-path plane. Moving 
the cyclic pitch control increases the AOA of one rotor blade 
with the result that a greater lifting force is applied at that 
point in the plane of rotation. This same control movement 
simultaneously decreases the AOA of the other blade the same 
amount, thus decreasing the lifting force applied at that point 
in the plane of rotation. The blade with the increased AOA 
tends to flap up; the blade with the decreased AOA tends to 
flap down. Because the rotor disk acts like a gyro, the blades 
reach maximum deflection at a point approximately 90° 
later in the plane of rotation. As shown in Figure 2-30, the 
retreating blade AOA is increased and the advancing blade 
AOA is decreased resulting in a tipping forward of the tip-path 
plane, since maximum deflection takes place 90° later when 
the blades are at the rear and front, respectively. In a rotor 
system using three or more blades, the movement of the cyclic 
pitch control changes the AOA of each blade an appropriate 
amount so that the end result is the same.

The movement of the cyclic pitch control in a two-bladed 
rotor system increases the AOA of one rotor blade with 
the result that a greater lifting force is applied at this point 
in the plane of rotation. This same control movement 
simultaneously decreases the AOA of the other blade a like 
amount, thus decreasing the lifting force applied at this point 
in the plane of rotation. The blade with the increased AOA 
tends to rise; the blade with the decreased AOA tends to 
lower. However, gyroscopic precession prevents the blades 
from rising or lowering to maximum deflection until a point 
approximately 90° later in the plane of rotation. 

In a three-bladed rotor, the movement of the cyclic pitch 
control changes the AOA of each blade an appropriate 
amount so that the end result is the same, a tipping forward 
of the tip-path plane when the maximum change in AOA 
is made as each blade passes the same points at which the 
maximum increase and decrease are made for the two-
bladed rotor as shown in Figure 2-30. As each blade passes 
the 90° position on the left, the maximum increase in AOA 
occurs. As each blade passes the 90° position to the right, 
the maximum decrease in AOA occurs. Maximum deflection 
takes place 90° later, maximum upward deflection at the rear 
and maximum downward deflection at the front; the tip-path 
plane tips forward.

Helicopter Flight Conditions 
Hovering Flight
During hovering flight, a helicopter maintains a constant 
position over a selected point, usually a few feet above the 
ground. For a helicopter to hover, the lift and thrust produced 
by the rotor system act straight up and must equal the weight 
and drag, which act straight down. [Figure 2-31] While 
hovering, the amount of main rotor thrust can be changed 
to maintain the desired hovering altitude. This is done by 
changing the angle of incidence (by moving the collective) 
of the rotor blades and hence the AOA of the main rotor 
blades. Changing the AOA changes the drag on the rotor 
blades, and the power delivered by the engine must change 
as well to keep the rotor speed constant. 

The weight that must be supported is the total weight of the 
helicopter and its occupants. If the amount of lift is greater 


2-21

Low pitch applied

Blade rotation

High flap result

Low flap result

High pitch applied

Blade rotation

Figure 2-30. Gyroscopic precession.

Drag

Weight

  Lift

   Thrust

Figure 2-31. To maintain a hover at a constant altitude, enough lift 
and thrust must be generated to equal the weight of the helicopter 
and the drag produced by the rotor blades.

than the actual weight, the helicopter accelerates upwards 
until the lift force equals the weight gain altitude; if thrust is 
less than weight, the helicopter accelerates downward. When 
operating near the ground, the effect of the closeness to the 
ground changes this response. 

The drag of a hovering helicopter is mainly induced drag 
incurred while the blades are producing lift. There is, 
however, some profile drag on the blades as they rotate 
through the air. Throughout the rest of this discussion, the 
term drag includes both induced and profile drag.

An important consequence of producing thrust is torque. As 
discussed earlier, Newton’s third law states that for every 
action there is an equal and opposite reaction. Therefore, as 
the engine turns the main rotor system in a counterclockwise 
direction, the helicopter fuselage tends to turn clockwise. The 
amount of torque is directly related to the amount of engine 
power being used to turn the main rotor system. Remember, 
as power changes, torque changes.

To counteract this torque-induced turning tendency, an 
antitorque rotor or tail rotor is incorporated into most 
helicopter designs. A pilot can vary the amount of thrust 
produced by the tail rotor in relation to the amount of torque 
produced by the engine. As the engine supplies more power 
to the main rotor, the tail rotor must produce more thrust to 
overcome the increased torque effect. This is done through 
the use of antitorque pedals.


2-22

  B
lad

e rota
tion

 Blade rota
tion

Drift

Tail rotor thrust
Tail rotor

downwash

Torque

Torq
ue

Figure 2-32. A tail rotor is designed to produce thrust in a direction 
opposite torque. The thrust produced by the tail rotor is sufficient 
to move the helicopter laterally.

Translating Tendency or Drift
During hovering flight, a single main rotor helicopter tends to 
drift or move in the direction of tail rotor thrust. This drifting 
tendency is called translating tendency. [Figure 2-32] 

To counteract this drift, one or more of the following features 
may be used. All examples are for a counterclockwise rotating 
main rotor system.

• The main transmission is mounted at a slight angle to 
the left (when viewed from behind) so that the rotor 
mast has a built-in tilt to oppose the tail rotor thrust. 

• Flight controls can be rigged so that the rotor disk is 
tilted to the right slightly when the cyclic is centered. 
Whichever method is used, the tip-path plane is tilted 
slightly to the left in the hover. 

• If the transmission is mounted so the rotor shaft is 
vertical with respect to the fuselage, the helicopter 
“hangs” left skid low in the hover. The opposite is 
true for rotor systems turning clockwise when viewed 
from above. 

• In forward flight, the tail rotor continues to push to 
the right, and the helicopter makes a small angle with 
the wind when the rotors are level and the slip ball is 
in the middle. This is called inherent sideslip. 

Ground Effect
When hovering near the ground, a phenomenon known 
as ground effect takes place. This effect usually occurs at 
heights between the surface and approximately one rotor 
diameter above the surface. The friction of the ground 
causes the downwash from the rotor to move outwards from 
the helicopter. This changes the relative direction of the 

downwash from a purely vertical motion to a combination 
of vertical and horizontal motion. As the induced airflow 
through the rotor disk is reduced by the surface friction, the 
lift vector increases. This allows a lower rotor blade angle for 
the same amount of lift, which reduces induced drag. Ground 
effect also restricts the generation of blade tip vortices due to 
the downward and outward airflow making a larger portion 
of the blade produce lift. When the helicopter gains altitude 
vertically, with no forward airspeed, induced airflow is no 
longer restricted, and the blade tip vortices increase with 
the decrease in outward airflow. As a result, drag increases 
which means a higher pitch angle, and more power is needed 
to move the air down through the rotor.

Ground effect is at its maximum in a no-wind condition over 
a firm, smooth surface. Tall grass, rough terrain, and water 
surfaces alter the airflow pattern, causing an increase in rotor 
tip vortices. [Figure 2-33]

Coriolis Effect (Law of Conservation of Angular 
Momentum) 
The Coriolis effect is also referred to as the law of 
conservation of angular momentum. It states that the value 
of angular momentum of a rotating body does not change 
unless an external force is applied. In other words, a rotating 
body continues to rotate with the same rotational velocity 
until some external force is applied to change the speed of 
rotation. Angular momentum is moment of inertia (mass 
times distance from the center of rotation squared) multiplied 
by speed of rotation. Changes in angular velocity, known as 
angular acceleration and deceleration, take place as the mass 
of a rotating body is moved closer to or further away from 
the axis of rotation. The speed of the rotating mass increases 
or decreases in proportion to the square of the radius. An 
excellent example of this principle is a spinning ice skater. 
The skater begins rotation on one foot, with the other leg 
and both arms extended. The rotation of the skater’s body is 
relatively slow. When a skater draws both arms and one leg 
inward, the moment of inertia (mass times radius squared) 
becomes much smaller and the body is rotating almost faster 
than the eye can follow. Because the angular momentum 
must remain constant (no external force applied), the angular 
velocity must increase. The rotor blade rotating about the 
rotor hub possesses angular momentum. As the rotor begins 
to cone due to G-loading maneuvers, the diameter or the 
disk shrinks. Due to conservation of angular momentum, 
the blades continue to travel the same speed even though the 
blade tips have a shorter distance to travel due to reduced 
disk diameter. The action results in an increase in rotor rpm. 
Most pilots arrest this increase with an increase in collective 
pitch. Conversely, as G-loading subsides and the rotor disk 
flattens out from the loss of G-load induced coning, the 
blade tips now have a longer distance to travel at the same 


2-23

No
wind
hover

Downwash pattern
equidistant 360°

Out of Ground Effect (OGE) In Ground Effect (IGE)

Blade tip vortex
Large blade tip vortex

Figure 2-33. Air circulation patterns change when hovering out of ground effect (OGE) and when hovering in ground effect (IGE).

Drag

Weight

  Lift

   Thrust
Vertical ascent

Figure 2-34. To ascend vertically, more lift and thrust must be 
generated to overcome the forces of weight and drag.

Helicopter movement

Thrust

Drag

W
e
ig

h
t

Lift

Resultant

Resultant

Figure 2-35. The power required to maintain a straight-and-level 
flight and a stabilized airspeed. 

tip speed. This action results in a reduction of rotor rpm. 
However, if this drop in the rotor rpm continues to the point 
at which it attempts to decrease below normal operating 
rpm, the engine control system adds more fuel/power to 
maintain the specified engine rpm. If the pilot does not reduce 
collective pitch as the disk unloads, the combination of engine 
compensation for the rpm slow down and the additional pitch 
as G-loading increases may result in exceeding the torque 
limitations or power the engines can produce.

Vertical Flight
Hovering is actually an element of vertical flight. Increasing 
the AOA of the rotor blades (pitch) while keeping their 
rotation speed constant generates additional lift and the 
helicopter ascends. Decreasing the pitch causes the helicopter 

to descend. In a no wind condition, when lift and thrust are 
less than weight and drag, the helicopter descends vertically. 
If lift and thrust are greater than weight and drag, the 
helicopter ascends vertically. [Figure 2-34]

Forward Flight
In steady forward flight with no change in airspeed or vertical 
speed, the four forces of lift, thrust, drag, and weight must 
be in balance. Once the tip-path plane is tilted forward, the 
total lift-thrust force is also tilted forward. This resultant 
lift-thrust force can be resolved into two components—lift 
acting vertically upward and thrust acting horizontally in the 
direction of flight. In addition to lift and thrust, there is weight 
(the downward acting force) and drag (the force opposing the 
motion of an airfoil through the air). [Figure 2-35]


2-24

P
o

w
e
r 

re
q

u
ir

e
d

 (
h

o
rs

e
p

o
w

e
r)

Indicated airspeed (KIAS)

800

600

400

200

0
 0 40 60 80 100 120

C

Minimum power
for level flight(VY)

A B

Maximum
continuous

level 
(horizontal)

flight 
airspeed (VH)

Maximum continuous power available

Increasing power for
decreasing airspeed

Increasing power for
decreasing airspeed

  P
ow

er
 re

qu
ire

d 
to

 h
ov

er
 O

G
E

Downw
ard ve

locity
 of ai

r mo
lecu

les 
use

d b
y aft section of rotor

1
–5

 k
n

o
ts

Figure 2-37. The airflow pattern for 1–5 knots of forward airspeed. Note how the downwind vortex is beginning to dissipate and induced 
flow down through the rear of the rotor system is more horizontal. 

Figure 2-36. Changing force vectors results in aircraft movement. 

In straight-and-level (constant heading and at a constant 
altitude), unaccelerated forward flight, lift equals weight 
and thrust equals drag. If lift exceeds weight, the helicopter 
accelerates vertically until the forces are in balance; if thrust 
is less than drag, the helicopter slows until the forces are in 
balance. As the helicopter moves forward, it begins to lose 
altitude because lift is lost as thrust is diverted forward. 
However, as the helicopter begins to accelerate, the rotor 
system becomes more efficient due to the increased airflow. 
The result is excess power over that which is required to 
hover. Continued acceleration causes an even larger increase 
in airflow through the rotor disk and more excess power. In 
order to maintain unaccelerated flight, the pilot must not 
make any changes in power or in cyclic movement. Any 
such changes would cause the helicopter to climb or descend. 
Once straight-and-level flight is obtained, the pilot should 
make note of the power (torque setting) required and not 
make major adjustments to the flight controls. [Figure 2-36]
 
Translational Lift
Improved rotor efficiency resulting from directional flight is 
called translational lift. The efficiency of the hovering rotor 
system is greatly improved with each knot of incoming wind 
gained by horizontal movement of the aircraft or surface 
wind. As incoming wind produced by aircraft movement or 
surface wind enters the rotor system, turbulence and vortices 
are left behind and the flow of air becomes more horizontal. 
In addition, the tail rotor becomes more aerodynamically 
efficient during the transition from hover to forward flight. 
Translational thrust occurs when the tail rotor becomes more 
aerodynamically efficient during the transition from hover 
to forward flight. As the tail rotor works in progressively 
less turbulent air, this improved efficiency produces more 
antitorque thrust, causing the nose of the aircraft to yaw left 
(with a main rotor turning counterclockwise) and forces the 

pilot to apply right pedal (decreasing the AOA in the tail 
rotor blades) in response. In addition, during this period, the 
airflow affects the horizontal components of the stabilizer 
found on most helicopters which tends to bring the nose 
of the helicopter to a more level attitude. Figure 2-37 and 
Figure 2-38 show airflow patterns at different speeds and 
how airflow affects the efficiency of the tail rotor. 

Effective Translational Lift (ETL)
While transitioning to forward flight at about 16–24 knots, 
the helicopter experiences effective translational lift (ETL). 
As mentioned earlier in the discussion on translational lift, 


2-25

10–15 knots

Airflow pattern just prior to effective translational lift

Figure 2-38. An airflow pattern at a speed of 10–15 knots. At this increased airspeed, the airflow continues to become more horizontal. 
The leading edge of the downwash pattern is being overrun and is well back under the nose of the helicopter.

16–24 knots

No recirculation
of air

More horizontal
flow of air

Reduced induced flow
increases angle of attack

Tail rotor operates in
relatively clean air

Figure 2-39. Effective translational lift is easily recognized in actual 
flight by a transient induced aerodynamic vibration and increased 
performance of the helicopter.

the rotor blades become more efficient as forward airspeed 
increases. Between 16–24 knots, the rotor system completely 
outruns the recirculation of old vortices and begins to work 
in relatively undisturbed air. The flow of air through the 
rotor system is more horizontal, therefore induced flow 
and induced drag are reduced. The AOA is subsequently 
increased, which makes the rotor system operate more 
efficiently. This increased efficiency continues with increased 
airspeed until the best climb airspeed is reached, and total 
drag is at its lowest point. 

As speed increases, translational lift becomes more effective, 
the nose rises or pitches up, and the aircraft rolls to the right. 
The combined effects of dissymmetry of lift, gyroscopic 
precession, and transverse flow effect cause this tendency. It is 
important to understand these effects and anticipate correcting 
for them. Once the helicopter is transitioning through ETL, 
the pilot needs to apply forward and left lateral cyclic input to 
maintain a constant rotor-disk attitude. [Figure 2-39]

Dissymmetry of Lift
Dissymmetry of lift is the differential (unequal) lift between 
advancing and retreating halves of the rotor disk caused by the 
different wind flow velocity across each half. This difference 
in lift would cause the helicopter to be uncontrollable in any 
situation other than hovering in a calm wind. There must 
be a means of compensating, correcting, or eliminating this 
unequal lift to attain symmetry of lift.

When the helicopter moves through the air, the relative airflow 
through the main rotor disk is different on the advancing side 
than on the retreating side. The relative wind encountered 
by the advancing blade is increased by the forward speed 
of the helicopter; while the relative windspeed acting on 
the retreating blade is reduced by the helicopter’s forward 
airspeed. Therefore, as a result of the relative windspeed, the 
advancing blade side of the rotor disk produces more lift than 
the retreating blade side. [Figure 2-40]

If this condition was allowed to exist, a helicopter with a 
counterclockwise main rotor blade rotation would roll to the 
left because of the difference in lift. In reality, the main rotor 
blades flap and feather automatically to equalize lift across 
the rotor disk. Articulated rotor systems, usually with three or 
more blades, incorporate a horizontal hinge (flapping hinge) 
to allow the individual rotor blades to move, or flap up and 
down as they rotate. A semirigid rotor system (two blades) 
utilizes a teetering hinge, which allows the blades to flap as 
a unit. When one blade flaps up, the other blade flaps down.


2-26

Relative wind

Angle of attack

Angle of attack at 3 o’clock positionA

Upflap velocity

Resultant relative wind

Chord line

Angle of attack over noseB

Resultant relative wind

Chord line

Angle of attack at 9 o’clock positionC

Downflap velocity
Resultant relative w

ind

Chord line

Angle of attack over tailD

Resultant relative wind

Chord line



Bl
ad

e r
ota

tion

A

B

C

D

Figure 2-41. The combined upward flapping (reduced lift) of the advancing blade and downward flapping (increased lift) of the retreating 
blade equalizes lift across the main rotor disk counteracting dissymmetry of lift.

 Blade
 ro

tat
ion

   
  B

la

de
 ro

tation

R
e
la

tiv
e
 w

in
d

Forward flight at 100 knots

R
e
la

tiv
e
 w

in
d

Direction of Flight

Advancing SideRetreating Side

Blade tip
 speed

  plus
  helicopter

 speed
(400 knots)

Blade tip
speed 
minus
helicopter
speed
(200 knots)

Figure 2-40. The blade tip speed of this helicopter is approximately 
300 knots. If the helicopter is moving forward at 100 knots, the 
relative windspeed on the advancing side is 400 knots. On the 
retreating side, it is only 200 knots. This difference in speed causes 
a dissymmetry of lift.

As the rotor blade reaches the advancing side of the rotor 
disk, it reaches its maximum upward flapping velocity. 
[Figure 2-41A] When the blade flaps upward, the angle 
between the chord line and the resultant relative wind 

decreases. This decreases the AOA, which reduces the 
amount of lift produced by the blade. At position C, the rotor 
blade is at its maximum downward flapping velocity. Due 
to downward flapping, the angle between the chord line and 
the resultant relative wind increases. This increases the AOA 
and thus the amount of lift produced by the blade.

The combination of blade flapping and slow relative wind 
acting on the retreating blade normally limits the maximum 
forward speed of a helicopter. At a high forward speed, the 
retreating blade stalls due to high AOA and slow relative 
wind speed. This situation is called “retreating blade 
stall” and is evidenced by a nose-up pitch, vibration, and 
a rolling tendency—usually to the left in helicopters with 
counterclockwise blade rotation. Pilots can avoid retreating 
blade stall by not exceeding the never-exceed speed. This 
speed is designated VNE and is indicated on a placard and 
marked on the airspeed indicator by a red line.

During aerodynamic flapping of the rotor blades as they 
compensate for dissymmetry of lift, the advancing blade 
achieves maximum upward flapping displacement over the 
nose and maximum downward flapping displacement over 
the tail. This causes the tip-path plane to tilt to the rear and 
is referred to as blowback. Figure 2-42 shows how the rotor 


2-27

Figure 2-42. To compensate for blowback, move the cyclic forward. 
Blowback is more pronounced with higher airspeeds. 

Normal Powered Flight Autorotation

Di
re

cti
on

 of
 fli

gh
t

Direction of flight

Figure 2-43. During an autorotation, the upward flow of relative wind permits the main rotor blades to rotate at their normal speed. In 
effect, the blades are “gliding” in their rotational plane.

disk is originally oriented with the front down following 
the initial cyclic input. As airspeed is gained and flapping 
eliminates dissymmetry of lift, the front of the disk comes 
up, and the back of the disk goes down. This reorientation 
of the rotor disk changes the direction in which total rotor 
thrust acts; the helicopter’s forward speed slows, but can be 
corrected with cyclic input. The pilot uses cyclic feathering 
to compensate for dissymmetry of lift allowing him or her 
to control the attitude of the rotor disk.

Cyclic feathering compensates for dissymmetry of lift 
(changes the AOA) in the following way. At a hover, equal 
lift is produced around the rotor system with equal pitch and 
AOA on all the blades and at all points in the rotor system 
(disregarding compensation for translating tendency). The 
rotor disk is parallel to the horizon. To develop a thrust force, 
the rotor system must be tilted in the desired direction of 
movement. Cyclic feathering changes the angle of incidence 
differentially around the rotor system. Forward cyclic 
movements decrease the angle of incidence at one part on 

the rotor system while increasing the angle at another part. 
Maximum downward flapping of the blade over the nose 
and maximum upward flapping over the tail tilt both rotor 
disk and thrust vector forward. To prevent blowback from 
occurring, the pilot must continually move the cyclic forward 
as the velocity of the helicopter increases. Figure 2-42 
illustrates the changes in pitch angle as the cyclic is moved 
forward at increased airspeeds. At a hover, the cyclic is 
centered and the pitch angle on the advancing and retreating 
blades is the same. At low forward speeds, moving the cyclic 
forward reduces pitch angle on the advancing blade and 
increases pitch angle on the retreating blade. This causes 
a slight rotor tilt. At higher forward speeds, the pilot must 
continue to move the cyclic forward. This further reduces 
pitch angle on the advancing blade and further increases 
pitch angle on the retreating blade. As a result, there is even 
more tilt to the rotor than at lower speeds.

This horizontal lift component (thrust) generates higher 
helicopter airspeed. The higher airspeed induces blade 
flapping to maintain symmetry of lift. The combination of 
flapping and cyclic feathering maintains symmetry of lift and 
desired attitude on the rotor system and helicopter.

Autorotation
Autorotation is the state of flight in which the main rotor system 
of a helicopter is being turned by the action of air moving up 
through the rotor rather than engine power driving the rotor. 
[Figure 2-43] In normal, powered flight, air is drawn into the 
main rotor system from above and exhausted downward, but 
during autorotation, air moves up into the rotor system from 
below as the helicopter descends. Autorotation is permitted 
mechanically by a freewheeling unit, which is a special clutch 
mechanism that allows the main rotor to continue turning even 
if the engine is not running. If the engine fails, the freewheeling 


2-28

Pitch link

Rotating swash plate

Control rod

Stationary swash plate

Figure 2-45. Raising the collective pitch control increases the pitch angle by the same amount on all blades.

Figure 2-44. Stationary and rotating swash plate. 

unit automatically disengages the engine from the main rotor 
allowing the main rotor to rotate freely. It is the means by 
which a helicopter can be landed safely in the event of an 
engine failure; consequently, all helicopters must demonstrate 
this capability in order to be certificated. 

Rotorcraft Controls
Swash Plate Assembly
The purpose of the swash plate is to transmit control inputs 
from the collective and cyclic controls to the main rotor 
blades. It consists of two main parts: the stationary swash 
plate and the rotating swash plate. [Figure 2-44] 

The stationary swash plate is mounted around the main rotor 
mast and connected to the cyclic and collective controls 
by a series of pushrods. It is restrained from rotating by an 
antidrive link but is able to tilt in all directions and move 
vertically. The rotating swash plate is mounted to the 
stationary swash plate by a uniball sleeve. It is connected to 
the mast by drive links and is allowed to rotate with the main 
rotor mast. Both swash plates tilt and slide up and down as 
one unit. The rotating swash plate is connected to the pitch 
horns by the pitch links.

There are three major controls in a helicopter that the pilot 
must use during flight. They are the collective pitch control, 
cyclic pitch control, and antitorque pedals or tail rotor control. 
In addition to these major controls, the pilot must also use the 

throttle control, which is mounted directly to the collective 
pitch control in order to fly the helicopter. 

Collective Pitch Control
The collective pitch control is located on the left side of the 
pilot’s seat and is operated with the left hand. The collective 
is used to make changes to the pitch angle of all the main 
rotor blades simultaneously, or collectively, as the name 
implies. As the collective pitch control is raised, there is a 
simultaneous and equal increase in pitch angle of all main 
rotor blades; as it is lowered, there is a simultaneous and 
equal decrease in pitch angle. [Figure 2-45] This is done 
through a series of mechanical linkages, and the amount 
of movement in the collective lever determines the amount 


2-29

Twist grip throttle

Figure 2-46. A twist grip throttle is usually mounted on the end 
of the collective lever. The throttles on some turbine helicopters 
are mounted on the overhead panel or on the floor in the cockpit.

Increasing the throttle increases 
manifold pressure and rpm

Lowering the collective pitch 
decreases manifold pressure 
and increases rpm

Raising the collective pitch 
increases manifold pressure and 
decreases rpm

Reducing the throttle decreases 
manifold pressure and rpm

Solution
If manifold
pressure is

  and rpm is

HIGH

LOW

LOW LOW

LOW

HIGH HIGH

HIGH

Figure 2-47. Relationship between manifold pressure, rpm, 
collective, and throttle.

of blade pitch change. An adjustable friction control helps 
prevent inadvertent collective pitch movement.

Throttle Control
The function of the throttle is to regulate engine rpm. If the 
correlator or governor system does not maintain the desired 
rpm when the collective is raised or lowered, or if those 
systems are not installed, the throttle must be moved manually 
with the twist grip to maintain rpm. The throttle control is 
much like a motorcycle throttle, and works almost the same 
way; twisting the throttle to the left increases rpm, twisting 
the throttle to the right decreases rpm. [Figure 2-46]

Governor/Correlator 
A governor is a sensing device that senses rotor and engine rpm 
and makes the necessary adjustments in order to keep rotor rpm 
constant. Once the rotor rpm is set in normal operations, the 
governor keeps the rpm constant, and there is no need to make 
any throttle adjustments. Governors are common on all turbine 
helicopters (as it is a function of the fuel control system of the 
turbine engine), and used on some piston-powered helicopters.

A correlator is a mechanical connection between the 
collective lever and the engine throttle. When the collective 
lever is raised, power is automatically increased and when 
lowered, power is decreased. This system maintains rpm 
close to the desired value, but still requires adjustment of 
the throttle for fine tuning.

Some helicopters do not have correlators or governors and 
require coordination of all collective and throttle movements. 
When the collective is raised, the throttle must be increased; 
when the collective is lowered, the throttle must be decreased. 
As with any aircraft control, large adjustments of either 
collective pitch or throttle should be avoided. All corrections 
should be made with smooth pressure.

In piston helicopters, the collective pitch is the primary 
control for manifold pressure, and the throttle is the primary 
control for rpm. However, the collective pitch control also 
influences rpm, and the throttle also influences manifold 
pressure; therefore, each is considered to be a secondary 
control of the other’s function. Both the tachometer (rpm 
indicator) and the manifold pressure gauge must be analyzed 
to determine which control to use. Figure 2-47 illustrates 
this relationship.

Cyclic Pitch Control
The cyclic pitch control is mounted vertically from the 
cockpit floor, between the pilot’s legs or, in some models, 
between the two pilot seats. [Figure 2-48] This primary flight 
control allows the pilot to fly the helicopter in any horizontal 
direction; fore, aft, and sideways. The total lift force is always 
perpendicular to the tip-path place of the main rotor. The 
purpose of the cyclic pitch control is to tilt the tip-path plane 
in the direction of the desired horizontal direction. The cyclic 
control changes the direction of this force and controls the 
attitude and airspeed of the helicopter. 

The rotor disk tilts in the same direction the cyclic pitch 
control is moved. If the cyclic is moved forward, the rotor 
disk tilts forward; if the cyclic is moved aft, the disk tilts 
aft, and so on. Because the rotor disk acts like a gyro, the 
mechanical linkages for the cyclic control rods are rigged 
in such a way that they decrease the pitch angle of the rotor 
blade approximately 90° before it reaches the direction of 
cyclic displacement, and increase the pitch angle of the 
rotor blade approximately 90° after it passes the direction of 
displacement. An increase in pitch angle increases AOA; a 
decrease in pitch angle decreases AOA. For example, if the 
cyclic is moved forward, the AOA decreases as the rotor blade 
passes the right side of the helicopter and increases on the left 
side. This results in maximum downward deflection of the 


2-30

Figure 2-49. Antitorque pedals compensate for changes in torque 
and control heading in a hover. 

Cyclic pitch control

Cyclic pitch control

Figure 2-48. The cyclic pitch control may be mounted vertically 
between the pilot’s knees or on a teetering bar from a single cyclic 
located in the center of the helicopter. The cyclic can pivot in all 
directions. 

rotor blade in front of the helicopter and maximum upward 
deflection behind it, causing the rotor disk to tilt forward.

Antitorque Pedals
The antitorque pedals are located on the cabin floor by the 
pilot’s feet. They control the pitch and, therefore, the thrust of 
the tail rotor blades. [Figure 2-49] Newton’s third law applies 
to the helicopter fuselage and how it rotates in the opposite 
direction of the main rotor blades unless counteracted and 
controlled. To make flight possible and to compensate for this 
torque, most helicopter designs incorporate an antitorque rotor 
or tail rotor. The antitorque pedals allow the pilot to control 
the pitch angle of the tail rotor blades which in forward flight 
puts the helicopter in longitudinal trim and while at a hover, 
enables the pilot to turn the helicopter 360°. The antitorque 
pedals are connected to the pitch change mechanism on the 
tail rotor gearbox and allow the pitch angle on the tail rotor 
blades to be increased or decreased.

Helicopters that are designed with tandem rotors do not have 
an antitorque rotor. These helicopters are designed with both 
rotor systems rotating in opposite directions to counteract the 
torque, rather than using a tail rotor. Directional antitorque 
pedals are used for directional control of the aircraft while in 
flight, as well as while taxiing with the forward gear off the 
ground. With the right pedal displaced forward, the forward 
rotor disk tilts to the right, while the aft rotor disk tilts to 
the left. The opposite occurs when the left pedal is pushed 
forward; the forward rotor disk inclines to the left, and the aft 
rotor disk tilts to the right. Differing combinations of pedal 
and cyclic application can allow the tandem rotor helicopter 
to pivot about the aft or forward vertical axis, as well as 
pivoting about the center of mass.

Stabilizer Systems
Bell Stabilizer Bar System
Arthur M. Young discovered that stability could be increased 
significantly with the addition of a stabilizer bar perpendicular 
to the two blades. The stabilizer bar has weighted ends, which 
cause it to stay relatively stable in the plane of rotation. The 
stabilizer bar is linked with the swash plate in a manner that 
reduces the pitch rate. The two blades can flap as a unit and, 
therefore, do not require lag-lead hinges (the whole rotor slows 
down and accelerates per turn). Two-bladed systems require 
a single teetering hinge and two coning hinges to permit 
modest coning of the rotor disk as thrust is increased. The 
configuration is known under multiple names, including Hiller 
panels, Hiller system, Bell-Hiller system, and flybar system.


2-31

 Helicopter Vibration Types

 Frequency Level

Extreme low frequency

Low frequency

Medium frequency

High frequency

Less than 1/rev PYLON ROCK

1/rev or 2/rev type vibration

Generally 4, 5, or 6/rev

Tail rotor speed or faster

Vibration

Figure 2-50. Various helicopter vibration types.

Offset Flapping Hinge
The offset flapping hinge is offset from the center of the rotor 
hub and can produce powerful moments useful for controlling 
the helicopter. The distance of the hinge from the hub (the 
offset) multiplied by the force produced at the hinge produces 
a moment at the hub. Obviously, the larger the offset, the 
greater the moment for the same force produced by the blade. 

The flapping motion is the result of the constantly changing 
balance between lift, centrifugal, and inertial forces. This 
rising and falling of the blades is characteristic of most 
helicopters and has often been compared to the beating of 
a bird’s wing. The flapping hinge, together with the natural 
flexibility found in most blades, permits the blade to droop 
considerably when the helicopter is at rest and the rotor is not 
turning over. During flight, the necessary rigidity is provided 
by the powerful centrifugal force that results from the rotation 
of the blades. This force pulls outward from the tip, stiffening 
the blade, and is the only factor that keeps it from folding up.

Stability Augmentation Systems (SAS)
Some helicopters incorporate stability augmentation systems 
(SAS) to help stabilize the helicopter in flight and in a hover. 
The simplest of these systems is a force trim system, which 
uses a magnetic clutch and springs to hold the cyclic control in 
the position at which it was released. More advanced systems 
use electric actuators that make inputs to the hydraulic servos. 
These servos receive control commands from a computer 
that senses helicopter attitude. Other inputs, such as heading, 
speed, altitude, and navigation information may be supplied 
to the computer to form a complete autopilot system. The 
SAS may be overridden or disconnected by the pilot at any 
time. SAS reduces pilot workload by improving basic aircraft 
control harmony and decreasing disturbances. These systems 
are very useful when the pilot is required to perform other 
duties, such as sling loading and search and rescue operations.

Helicopter Vibration
The following paragraphs describe the various types of 
vibrations. Figure 2-50 shows the general levels into which 
frequencies are divided.

Extreme Low Frequency Vibration
Extreme low frequency vibration is pretty well limited to pylon 
rock. Pylon rocking (two to three cycles per second) is inherent 
with the rotor, mast, and transmission system. To keep the 
vibration from reaching noticeable levels, transmission mount 
dampening is incorporated to absorb the rocking. 

Low Frequency Vibration
Low frequency vibrations (1/rev and 2/rev) are caused by the 
rotor itself. 1/rev vibrations are of two basic types: vertical 
or lateral. A 1/rev is caused simply by one blade developing 
more lift at a given point than the other blade develops at 
the same point. 

Medium Frequency Vibration
Medium frequency vibration (4/rev and 6/rev) is another 
vibration inherent in most rotors. An increase in the level of 
these vibrations is caused by a change in the capability of the 
fuselage to absorb vibration, or a loose airframe component, 
such as the skids, vibrating at that frequency. 

High Frequency Vibration
High frequency vibrations can be caused by anything in the 
helicopter that rotates or vibrates at extremely high speeds. 
A high frequency vibration typically occurs when the tail 
rotor gears, tail drive shaft or the tail rotor engine, fan or 
shaft assembly vibrates or rotates at an equal or greater speed 
than the tail rotor.

Rotor Blade Tracking
Blade tracking is the process of determining the positions 
of the tips of the rotor blade relative to each other while the 
rotor head is turning, and of determining the corrections 
necessary to hold these positions within certain tolerances. 
The blades should all track one another as closely as possible. 
The purpose of blade tracking is to bring the tips of all blades 
into the same tip path throughout their entire cycle of rotation. 
Various methods of blade tracking are explained below.

Flag and Pole
The flag and pole method, as shown in Figure 2-51, shows 
the relative positions of the rotor blades. The blade tips are 
marked with chalk or a grease pencil. Each blade tip should 
be marked with a different color so that it is easy to determine 
the relationship of the other tips of the rotor blades to each 
other. This method can be used on all types of helicopters 
that do not have jet propulsion at the blade tips. Refer to 
the applicable maintenance manual for specific procedures.


2-32

BLADE

  7

0°
 to

 80°
Curtain

Pole

Line parallel to longitudinal axis of helicopter

Leading edge

Position of chalk mark (approximately 2 inches long)

Curtain

Blade

Pole

Handle

Pole

Curtain

1/2" max spread (typical)

Approximate position of chalk marks

BALANCER
MODEL 177M-6A

DOUBLE

FUNCTION

A  Channel  B

TEST

PUSH FOR
SCALE 2

TRACK
A B

COMMON

MAGNETIC
PICKUP

X1

X10

X100

RPM RANGE

RPM TONE

PHAZOR

12

6

39

1

2

4

57

8

10

11

Meter

Band-pass filter

Phase meter

Figure 2-52. Balancer/Phazor.

Figure 2-51. Flag and pole blade tracking.

RPM

STROBEX
MODEL 135M-11

Strobe flash tube RPM dial

Figure 2-53. Strobex tracker.

Electronic Blade Tracker
The most common electronic blade tracker consists of 
a Balancer/Phazor, Strobex tracker, and Vibrex tester. 
[Figures 2-52 through 2-54] The Strobex blade tracker 
permits blade tracking from inside or outside the helicopter 
while on the ground or inside the helicopter in flight. The 
system uses a highly concentrated light beam flashing in 

sequence with the rotation of the main rotor blades so that a 
fixed target at the blade tips appears to be stopped. Each blade 
is identified by an elongated retroreflective number taped or 
attached to the underside of the blade in a uniform location. 
When viewed at an angle from inside the helicopter, the taped 
numbers will appear normal. Tracking can be accomplished 
with tracking tip cap reflectors and a strobe light. The tip 


2-33

TESTER

Interrupter plate

Motor

Figure 2-54. Vibrex tracker.

Figure 2-55. Tail rotor tracking.

caps are temporarily attached to the tip of each blade. The 
high-intensity strobe light flashes in time with the rotating 
blades. The strobe light operates from the aircraft electrical 
power supply. By observing the reflected tip cap image, it 
is possible to view the track of the rotating blades. Tracking 
is accomplished in a sequence of four separate steps: ground 
tracking, hover verification, forward flight tracking, and 
autorotation rpm adjustment.

Tail Rotor Tracking
The marking and electronic methods of tail rotor tracking 
are explained in the following paragraphs.

Marking Method
Procedures for tail rotor tracking using the marking method, 
as shown in Figure 2-55, are as follows:

• After replacement or installation of tail rotor hub, 
blades, or pitch change system, check tail rotor rigging 
and track tail rotor blades. Tail rotor tip clearance shall 
be set before tracking and checked again after tracking.

• The strobe-type tracking device may be used if 
available. Instructions for use are provided with the 
device. Attach a piece of soft rubber hose six inches 
long on the end of a ½ × ½ inch pine stick or other 
flexible device. Cover the rubber hose with Prussian 
blue or similar type of coloring thinned with oil. 

NOTE: Ground run-up shall be performed by authorized 
personnel only. Start engine in accordance with applicable 

maintenance manual. Run engine with pedals in neutral 
position. Reset marking device on underside of tail boom 
assembly. Slowly move marking device into disk of tail rotor 
approximately one inch from tip. When near blade is marked, 
stop engine and allow rotor to stop. Repeat this procedure 
until tracking mark crosses over to the other blade, then 
extend pitch control link of unmarked blade one half turn. 

Electronic Method
The electronic Vibrex balancing and tracking kit is housed in 
a carrying case and consists of a Model 177M-6A Balancer, 
a Model 135M-11 Strobex, track and balance charts, an 
accelerometer, cables, and attaching brackets. 

The Vibrex balancing kit is used to measure and indicate the 
level of vibration induced by the main rotor and tail rotor of 
a helicopter. The Vibrex analyzes the vibration induced by 
out-of-track or out-of-balance rotors, and then by plotting 
vibration amplitude and clock angle on a chart the amount 
and location of rotor track or weight change is determined. In 
addition, the Vibrex is used in troubleshooting by measuring 
the vibration levels and frequencies or rpm of unknown 
disturbances.


2-34

1. Intake 2. Compression

3. Power 4. Exhaust

Intake valve

Spark plug

Exhaust valve

Piston

Crankshaft Connecting rod

Figure 2-56. The arrows indicate the direction of motion of the 
crankshaft and piston during the four-stroke cycle. 

Rotor Blade Preservation and Storage
Accomplish the following requirements for rotor blade 
preservation and storage:

 • Condemn, demilitarize, and dispose of locally any 
blade which has incurred nonrepairable damage. 

• Tape all holes in the blade, such as tree damage, or 
foreign object damage (FOD) to protect the interior 
of the blade from moisture and corrosion. 

• Thoroughly remove foreign matter from the entire 
exterior surface of blade with mild soap and water. 

• Protect blade outboard eroded surfaces with a light 
coating of corrosion preventive or primer coating. 

• Protect blade main bolt hole bushing, drag brace 
retention bolt hole bushing, and any exposed bare 
metal (i.e., grip and drag pads) with a light coating of 
corrosion preventive. 

• Secure blade to shock-mounted support and secure 
container lid. 

• Place copy of manufacturer’s blade records, containing 
information required by Title 14 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations (14 CFR) section 91.417(a)(2)(ii), and 
any other blade records in a waterproof bag and insert 
into container record tube. 

• Obliterate old markings from the container that 
pertained to the original shipment or to the original 
item it contained. Annotate the blade model, part 
number (P/N) and serial number, as applicable, on 
the outside of the container.

Helicopter Power Systems
Powerplant
The two most common types of engines used in helicopters 
are the reciprocating engine and the turbine engine. 
Reciprocating engines, also called piston engines, are 
generally used in smaller helicopters. Most training 
helicopters use reciprocating engines because they are 
relatively simple and inexpensive to operate. Turbine 
engines are more powerful and are used in a wide variety of 
helicopters. They produce a tremendous amount of power 
for their size but are generally more expensive to operate.

Reciprocating Engine
The reciprocating engine consists of a series of pistons 
connected to a rotating crankshaft. As the pistons move up 
and down, the crankshaft rotates. The reciprocating engine 
gets its name from the back-and-forth movement of its 
internal parts. The four-stroke engine is the most common 
type, and refers to the four different cycles the engine 
undergoes to produce power. [Figure 2-56]

When the piston moves away from the cylinder head on 
the intake stroke, the intake valve opens and a mixture of 
fuel and air is drawn into the combustion chamber. As the 
cylinder moves back toward the cylinder head, the intake 
valve closes, and the fuel/air mixture is compressed. When 
compression is nearly complete, the spark plugs fire and the 
compressed mixture is ignited to begin the power stroke. 
The rapidly expanding gases from the controlled burning of 
the fuel/air mixture drive the piston away from the cylinder 
head, thus providing power to rotate the crankshaft. The 
piston then moves back toward the cylinder head on the 
exhaust stroke where the burned gases are expelled through 
the opened exhaust valve. Even when the engine is operated 
at a fairly low speed, the four-stroke cycle takes place several 
hundred times each minute. In a four-cylinder engine, each 
cylinder operates on a different stroke. Continuous rotation 
of a crankshaft is maintained by the precise timing of the 
power strokes in each cylinder.


2-35

Output Shaft

Air inlet

Centrifugal Compression Section Turbine Section Combustion Section
Gearbox
Section

Inlet air
Compressor discharge air
Combustion gases
Exhaust gases

Combustion liner

Exhaust air outlet

Compressor rotor

Fuel nozzle

Igniter plug

N1 RotorN2 Rotor Stator

Gear

Figure 2-57. Many helicopters use a turboshaft engine as shown above to drive the main transmission and rotor systems. The main 
difference between a turboshaft and a turbojet engine is that most of the energy produced by the expanding gases is used to drive a 
turbine rather than producing thrust through the expulsion of exhaust gases. 

Turbine Engine
The gas turbine engine mounted on most helicopters is 
made up of a compressor, combustion chamber, turbine, 
and accessory gearbox assembly. The compressor draws 
filtered air into the plenum chamber and compresses it. The 
compressed air is directed to the combustion section through 
discharge tubes where atomized fuel is injected into it. The 
fuel/air mixture is ignited and allowed to expand. This 
combustion gas is then forced through a series of turbine 
wheels causing them to turn. These turbine wheels provide 
power to both the engine compressor and the accessory 
gearbox. Power is provided to the main rotor and tail rotor 
systems through the freewheeling unit which is attached 
to the accessory gearbox power output gear shaft. The 
combustion gas is finally expelled through an exhaust outlet. 
[Figure 2-57]

Transmission System
The transmission system transfers power from the engine to 
the main rotor, tail rotor, and other accessories during normal 
flight conditions. The main components of the transmission 
system are the main rotor transmission, tail rotor drive 
system, clutch, and freewheeling unit. The freewheeling unit, 
or autorotative clutch, allows the main rotor transmission to 
drive the tail rotor drive shaft during autorotation. Helicopter 
transmissions are normally lubricated and cooled with their 
own oil supply. A sight gauge is provided to check the 
oil level. Some transmissions have chip detectors located 
in the sump. These detectors are wired to warning lights 
located on the pilot’s instrument panel that illuminate in the 
event of an internal problem. The chip detectors on modern 

helicopters have a “burn off” capability and attempt to correct 
the situation without pilot action. If the problem cannot be 
corrected on its own, the pilot must refer to the emergency 
procedures for that particular helicopter. 

Main Rotor Transmission
The primary purpose of the main rotor transmission is 
to reduce engine output rpm to optimum rotor rpm. This 
reduction is different for the various helicopters. As an 
example, suppose the engine rpm of a specific helicopter 
is 2,700. A rotor speed of 450 rpm would require a 6:1 
reduction. A 9:1 reduction would mean the rotor would turn 
at 300 rpm. Most helicopters use a dual-needle tachometer 
or a vertical scale instrument to show both engine and rotor 
rpm or a percentage of engine and rotor rpm. The rotor rpm 
indicator normally is used only during clutch engagement to 
monitor rotor acceleration, and in autorotation to maintain 
rpm within prescribed limits. [Figure 2-58]

In helicopters with horizontally mounted engines, another 
purpose of the main rotor transmission is to change the axis of 
rotation from the horizontal axis of the engine to the vertical 
axis of the rotor shaft. [Figure 2-59]

Clutch
In a conventional airplane, the engine and propeller are 
directly connected. However, in a helicopter there is a 
different relationship between the engine and the rotor. 
Because of the greater weight of a rotor in relation to the 
power of the engine, as compared to the weight of a propeller 
and the power in an airplane, the rotor must be disconnected 


2-36

Gearbox

Main transmission

to engine

Main rotor

Antitorque rotor

Figure 2-59. The main rotor transmission and gearbox reduce engine 
output rpm to optimum rotor rpm and change the axis of rotation 
of the engine output shaft to the vertical axis for the rotor shaft.

110
100

90
80
70

60
50

110
100

90
80

70
60

50

E      R

% RPM

% RPM

NR NP

120
110

105

100

95

90
80
70
60
40
0

RPM
X100

ROTOR

ENGINE

2
3

4

51

0

25

30

5

10

40

20
15

35R

ROTOR
PEEVER   
TURBINEA

PERCENT
RPM

0

70

30

10

40

110

60
50

20

80

90

100

120

R

T

Figure 2-58. There are various types of dual-needle tachometers; 
however, when the needles are superimposed, or married, the ratio 
of the engine rpm is the same as the gear reduction ratio. 

from the engine when the starter is engaged. A clutch allows 
the engine to be started and then gradually pick up the load 
of the rotor.

On free turbine engines, no clutch is required, as the gas 
producer turbine is essentially disconnected from the power 
turbine. When the engine is started, there is little resistance 

from the power turbine. This enables the gas producer turbine 
to accelerate to normal idle speed without the load of the 
transmission and rotor system dragging it down. As the gas 
pressure increases through the power turbine, the rotor blades 
begin to turn, slowly at first and then gradually accelerate to 
normal operating rpm.

On reciprocating helicopters, the two main types of clutches 
are the centrifugal clutch and the belt drive clutch.

Centrifugal Clutch
The centrifugal clutch is made up of an inner assembly and 
an outer drum. The inner assembly, which is connected to 
the engine driveshaft, consists of shoes lined with material 
similar to automotive brake linings. At low engine speeds, 
springs hold the shoes in, so there is no contact with the outer 
drum, which is attached to the transmission input shaft. As 
engine speed increases, centrifugal force causes the clutch 
shoes to move outward and begin sliding against the outer 
drum. The transmission input shaft begins to rotate, causing 
the rotor to turn, slowly at first, but increasing as the friction 
increases between the clutch shoes and transmission drum. 
As rotor speed increases, the rotor tachometer needle shows 
an increase by moving toward the engine tachometer needle. 
When the two needles are superimposed, the engine and the 
rotor are synchronized, indicating the clutch is fully engaged 
and there is no further slippage of the clutch shoes.

Belt Drive Clutch
Some helicopters utilize a belt drive to transmit power from 
the engine to the transmission. A belt drive consists of a 
lower pulley attached to the engine, an upper pulley attached 
to the transmission input shaft, a belt or a series of V-belts, 
and some means of applying tension to the belts. The belts 
fit loosely over the upper and lower pulley when there is 
no tension on the belts. This allows the engine to be started 
without any load from the transmission. Once the engine is 
running, tension on the belts is gradually increased. When the 
rotor and engine tachometer needles are superimposed, the 
rotor and the engine are synchronized, and the clutch is then 
fully engaged. Advantages of this system include vibration 
isolation, simple maintenance, and the ability to start and 
warm up the engine without engaging the rotor.

Freewheeling Unit
Since lift in a helicopter is provided by rotating airfoils, 
these airfoils must be free to rotate if the engine fails. The 
freewheeling unit automatically disengages the engine from 
the main rotor when engine rpm is less than main rotor rpm. 
This allows the main rotor and tail rotor to continue turning 
at normal in-flight speeds. The most common freewheeling 
unit assembly consists of a one-way sprag clutch located 
between the engine and main rotor transmission. This is 


2-37

Plus ( + ) condition

Minus ( − ) condition

Balance condition

Chord line

Tail-down underbalance

Chord line

Nose-down overbalance

Chord line

Level-horizontal position

Figure 2-60. Control surface static balance.

usually in the upper pulley in a piston helicopter or mounted 
on the accessory gearbox in a turbine helicopter. When the 
engine is driving the rotor, inclined surfaces in the sprag 
clutch force rollers against an outer drum. This prevents the 
engine from exceeding transmission rpm. If the engine fails, 
the rollers move inward, allowing the outer drum to exceed 
the speed of the inner portion. The transmission can then 
exceed the speed of the engine. In this condition, engine 
speed is less than that of the drive system, and the helicopter 
is in an autorotative state.

Airplane Assembly and Rigging
The primary assembly of a type certificated aircraft is normally 
performed by the manufacturer at the factory. The assembly 
includes putting together the major components, such as 
the fuselage, empennage, wing sections, nacelles, landing 
gear, and installing the powerplant. Attached to the wing 
and empennage are primary flight control surfaces including 
ailerons, elevators, and rudder. Additionally, installation 
of auxiliary flight control surfaces may include wing flaps, 
spoilers, speed brakes, slats, and leading edge flaps. 

The assembly of other aircraft outside of a manufacturer’s 
facility is usually limited to smaller size and experimental 
amateur-built aircraft. Typically, after a major overhaul, 
repair, or alteration, the reassembly of an aircraft may 
include reattaching wings to the fuselage, balancing of and 
installation of flight control surfaces, installation of the 
landing gear, and installation of the powerplant(s). 

Rebalancing of Control Surfaces
This section is presented for familiarization purposes only. 
Explicit instructions for the balancing of control surfaces are 
given in the manufacturer’s service and overhaul manuals for 
the specific aircraft and must be followed closely. 

Any time repairs on a control surface add weight fore or aft of 
the hinge center line, the control surface must be rebalanced. 
When an aircraft is repainted, the balance of the control 
surfaces must be checked. Any control surface that is out 
of balance is unstable and does not remain in a streamlined 
position during normal flight. For example, an aileron that 
is trailing edge heavy moves down when the wing deflects 
upward, and up when the wing deflects downward. Such a 
condition can cause unexpected and violent maneuvers of 
the aircraft. In extreme cases, fluttering and buffeting may 
develop to a degree that could cause the complete loss of 
the aircraft. 

Rebalancing a control surface concerns both static and 
dynamic balance. A control surface that is statically balanced 
is also dynamically balanced. 

Static Balance
Static balance is the tendency of an object to remain stationary 
when supported from its own CG. There are two ways in 
which a control surface may be out of static balance. They 
are called underbalance and overbalance. 

When a control surface is mounted on a balance stand, a 
downward travel of the trailing edge below the horizontal 
position indicates underbalance. Some manufacturers 
indicate this condition with a plus (+) sign. An upward 
movement of the trailing edge, above the horizontal position 
indicates overbalance. This is designated by a minus (–) sign. 
These signs show the need for more or less weight in the 
correct area to achieve a balanced control surface, as shown 
in Figure 2-60.

A tail-heavy condition (static underbalance) causes 
undesirable flight performance and is not usually allowed. 
Better flight operations are gained by nose-heavy static 
overbalance. Most manufacturers advocate the existence of 
nose-heavy control surfaces. 


2-38

Outboard hinge fitting

Inboard hinge fitting

Support stand

Hinge center line Bubble protractor

Chord line

Figure 2-62. Establishing a neutral position of the control surface.

Figure 2-61. Locally fabricated balancing fixture.

Dynamic Balance
Dynamic balance is that condition in a rotating body wherein 
all rotating forces are balanced within themselves so that no 
vibration is produced while the body is in motion. Dynamic 
balance as related to control surfaces is an effort to maintain 
balance when the control surface is submitted to movement 
on the aircraft in flight. It involves the placing of weights 
in the correct location along the span of the surfaces. The 
location of the weights are, in most cases, forward of the 
hinge center line. 

Rebalancing Procedures 
Repairs to a control surface or its tabs generally increase the 
weight aft of the hinge center line, requiring static rebalancing 
of the control surface system, as well as the tabs. Control 
surfaces to be rebalanced should be removed from the aircraft 
and supported, from their own points, on a suitable stand, 
jig, or fixture. [Figure 2-61] 

Trim tabs on the surface should be secured in the neutral 
position when the control surface is mounted on the stand. 
The stand must be level and be located in an area free of air 
currents. The control surface must be permitted to rotate 
freely about the hinge points without binding. Balance 
condition is determined by the behavior of the trailing edge 
when the surface is suspended from its hinge points. Any 
excessive friction would result in a false reaction as to the 
overbalance or underbalance of the surface. 

When installing the control surface in the stand or jig, a 
neutral position should be established with the chord line of 
the surface in a horizontal position. Use a bubble protractor 
to determine the neutral position before continuing balancing 
procedures. [Figure 2-62] 

Sometimes a visual check is all that is needed to determine 
whether the surface is balanced or unbalanced. Any trim tabs 
or other assemblies that are to remain on the surface during 
balancing procedures should be in place. If any assemblies 
or parts must be removed before balancing, they should be 
removed. 

Rebalancing Methods
Several methods of balancing (rebalancing) control surfaces 
are in use by the various manufacturers of aircraft. The most 
common are the calculation method, scale method, and the 
balance beam method. 

The calculation method of balancing a control surface has one 
advantage over the other methods in that it can be performed 
without removing the surface from the aircraft. In using the 
calculation method, the weight of the material from the repair 
area and the weight of the materials used to accomplish the 
repair must be known. Subtract the weight removed from 
the weight added to get the resulting net gain in the amount 
added to the surface. The distance from the hinge center line 
to the center of the repair area is then measured in inches. This 


2-39

Hinge center line

Center of repair area

Measurement in inches

Chord line

Figure 2-63. Calculation method measurement.

Rudder

Adjustable support

Trim tab

Bubble protractor

Hinge center line

Mounting bracket

Support stand

Weight scale

Figure 2-64. Balancing setup. 

distance must be determined to the nearest one-hundredth of 
an inch. [Figure 2-63] 

The next step is to multiply the distance times the net weight 
of the repair. This results in an inch-pounds (in-lb) answer. 
If the in-lb result of the calculations is within specified 
tolerances, the control surface is considered balanced. If 
it is not within specified limits, consult the manufacturer’s 
service manuals for the needed weights, material to use for 
weights, design for manufacture, and installation locations 
for addition of the weights.

The scale method of balancing a control surface requires the 
use of a scale that is graduated in hundredths of a pound. 
A support stand and balancing jigs for the surface are also 
required. Figure 2-64 illustrates a control surface mounted 
for rebalancing purposes. Use of the scale method requires 
the removal of the control surface from the aircraft.

The balance beam method is used by the Cessna and Piper 
Aircraft companies. This method requires that a specialized 
tool be locally fabricated. The manufacturer’s maintenance 
manual provides specific instructions and dimensions to 
fabricate the tool.

Once the control surface is placed on level supports, the 
weight required to balance the surface is established by 
moving the sliding weight on the beam. The maintenance 
manual indicates where the balance point should be. If the 
surface is found to be out of tolerance, the manual explains 
where to place weight to bring it into tolerance.

Aircraft manufacturers use different materials to balance 
control surfaces, the most common being lead or steel. 
Larger aircraft manufacturers may use depleted uranium 
because it has a heavier mass than lead. This allows the 
counterweights to be made smaller and still retain the same 
weight. Specific safety precautions must be observed when 
handling counterweights of depleted uranium because it is 
radioactive. The manufacturer’s maintenance manual and 
service instructions must be followed and all precautions 
observed when handling the weights. 

Aircraft Rigging
Aircraft rigging involves the adjustment and travel of movable 
flight controls which are attached to aircraft major surfaces, 
such as wings and vertical and horizontal stabilizers. Ailerons 
are attached to the wings, elevators are attached to the 
horizontal stabilizer, and the rudder is attached to the vertical 
stabilizer. Rigging involves setting cable tension, adjusting 
travel limits of flight controls, and setting travel stops. 

In addition to the flight controls, rigging is also performed 
on various components to include engine controls, flight 
deck controls, and retractable landing gear component parts. 
Rigging also includes the safetying of the attaching hardware 
using various types of cotter pins, locknuts, or safety wire. 

Rigging Specifications
Type Certificate Data Sheet
The Type Certificate Data Sheet (TCDS) is a formal 
description of an aircraft, engine, or propeller. It is issued by 
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) when the FAA 
determines that the product meets the applicable requirements 
for certification under 14 CFR. It lists the limitations and 
information required for type certification, including airspeed 
limits, weight limits, control surface movements, engine 
make and model, minimum crew, fuel type, thrust limits, 
rpm limits, etc., and the various components eligible for 
installation on the product.


2-40

1/8  — 3/8 diameter 7 x 19
7 strands, 19 wires to each strand

1/16 — 3/32 diameter 7 x 7
7 strands, 7 wires to each strand

Diameter

Diameter

Figure 2-65. Cable construction and cross-section. 

Maintenance Manual
A maintenance manual is developed by the manufacturer of 
the applicable product and provides the recommended and 
acceptable procedures to be followed when maintaining or 
repairing that product. Maintenance personnel are required 
by regulation to follow the applicable instructions set forth 
by the manufacturer. The Limitations section of the manual 
lists “life limits” of the product or its components that must 
be complied with during inspections and maintenance. 

Structural Repair Manual (SRM)
The structural repair manual is developed by the manufacturer’s 
engineering department to be used as a guideline to assist in 
the repair of common damage to a specific aircraft structure. 
It provides information for acceptable repairs of specific 
sections of the aircraft.

Manufacturer’s Service Information
Information from the manufacturer may be in the form of 
information bulletins, service instructions, service bulletins, 
service letters, etc., that the manufacturer publishes to provide 
instructions for product improvement. Service instructions may 
include a recommended modification or repair that precedes the 
issuance of an Airworthiness Directive (AD). Service letters 
may provide more descriptive procedures or revise sections of 
the maintenance manuals. They may also include instructions 
for the installation and repair of optional equipment, not listed 
in the Type Certificate Data Sheet (TCDS).

Airplane Assembly 
Aileron Installation 
The manufacturer’s maintenance and illustrated parts 
book must be followed to ensure the correct procedures 
and hardware are being used for installation of the control 
surfaces. All of the control surfaces require specific hardware, 
spacers, and bearings be installed to ensure the surface does 
not jam or become damaged during movement. After the 
aileron is connected to the flight deck controls, the control 
system must be inspected to ensure the cables/push-pull rods 
are routed properly. When a balance cable is installed, check 
for correct attachment and operation to determine the ailerons 
are moving in the proper direction and opposite each other.
 
Flap Installation
The design, installation, and systems that operate flaps are as 
varied as the models of airplanes on which they are installed. 
As with any system on a specific aircraft, the manufacturer’s 
maintenance manual and the illustrated parts book must 
be followed to ensure the correct procedures and parts are 
used. Simple flap systems are usually operated manually by 
cables and/or torque tubes. Typically, many of the smaller 
manufactured airplane designs have flaps that are actuated 

by torque tubes and chains through a gear box driven by an 
electric motor.

Empennage Installation
The empennage, consisting of the horizontal and vertical 
stabilizer, is not normally removed and installed, unless the 
aircraft was damaged. Elevators, rudders, and stabilators 
are rigged the same as any other control surface, using the 
instructions provided in the manufacturer’s maintenance 
manuals.

Control Operating Systems
Cable Systems
There are various types of cable:

• Material—aircraft control cables are fabricated from 
carbon steel or stainless (corrosion resistant) steel. 
Additionally, some manufacturers use a nylon coated 
cable that is produced by extruding a flexible nylon 
coating over corrosion-resistant steel (CRES) cable. 
By adding the nylon coating to the corrosion resistant 
steel cable, it increases the service life by protecting 
the cable strands from friction wear, keeping dirt and 
grit out, and dampening vibration which can work-
harden the wires in long runs of cable.

• Cable construction—the basic component of a cable 
is a wire. The diameter of the wire determines the 
total diameter of the cable. A number of wires are 
preformed into a helical or spiral shape and then 
formed into a strand. These preformed strands are laid 
around a straight center strand to form a cable. 

• Cable designations—based on the number of strands 
and wires in each strand. The 7 × 19 cable is made up 
of seven strands of 19 wires each. Six of these strands 
are laid around the center strand. This cable is very 
flexible and is used in primary control systems and 
in other locations where operation over pulleys is 
frequent. The 7 × 7 cable consists of seven strands of 
seven wires each. Six of these strands are laid around 
the center strand. This cable is of medium flexibility 
and is used for trim tab controls, engine controls, and 
indicator controls. [Figure 2-65]


2-41

3 1 2

Figure 2-66. Typical Nicopress® thimble-eye splice. 

AN663 Double shank ball end terminal

AN664 Single shank ball end terminal

AN665 Rod end terminal

AN666 Threaded cable terminal

AN667 Fork end cable terminal

AN667 Eye end cable terminal

Figure 2-67. Swage-type terminal fittings. 

Types of control cable termination include:

• Woven splice—a hand-woven 5-tuck splice used on 
aircraft cable. The process is very time consuming and 
produces only about 75 percent of the original cable 
strength. The splice is rarely used except on some 
antique aircraft where the effort is made to keep all 
parts in their original configuration.

• Nicopress® process—a patented process using copper 
sleeves and may be used up to the full rated strength of 
the cable when the cable is looped around a thimble. 
[Figure 2-66] This process may also be used in place 
of the 5-tuck splice on cables up to and including 3⁄8-
inch diameter. Whenever this process is used for cable 
splicing, it is imperative that the tools, instructions, 
and data supplied by Nicopress® be followed exactly 
to ensure the desired cable function and strength 
is attained. The use of sleeves that are fabricated 
of material other than copper requires engineering 
approval for the specific application by the FAA.

• Swage-type terminals—manufactured in accordance 
with Army-Navy (AN) and Military Standards (MS), 
are suitable for use in civil aircraft up to, and including, 
maximum cable loads. [Figure 2-67] 

When swaging tools are used, it is imperative that all the 
manufacturer’s instructions, including ‘go’ and ‘no-go’ 
dimensions, be followed exactly to avoid defective and 
inferior swaging. Compliance with all of the instructions 
should result in the terminal developing the full-rated strength 
of the cable. The following basic procedures are used when 
swaging terminals onto cable ends:

• Cut the cable to length, allowing for growth during 
swaging. Apply a preservative compound to the cable 
end before insertion into the terminal barrel. Measure 
the internal length of the terminal end/barrel of the 
fitting to determine the proper length of the cable to 

be inserted. Transfer that measurement to the end of 
the cable and mark it with a piece of masking tape 
wrapped around the cable. This provides a positive 
mark to ensure the cable did not slip during the 
swaging process. 

 NOTE: Never solder the cable ends to prevent fraying 
since the solder greatly increases the tendency of the 
cable to pull out of the terminal. 

• Insert the cable into the terminal approximately one 
inch and bend it toward the terminal. Then, push the 
cable end all the way into the terminal. The bending 
action puts a slight kink in the cable end and provides 
enough friction to hold the terminal in place until the 
swaging operation is performed. [Figure 2-68] 

• Accomplish the swaging operation in accordance with 
the instructions furnished by the manufacturer of the 
swaging equipment.


2-42

Before Swaging After Swaging

Cable size
(inches)

1/16

3/32

1/8

5/32

3/16

7/32

1/4

9/32

5/16

3/8

7 x 7

7 x 7

7 x 19

7 x 19

7 x 19

7 x 19

7 x 19

7 x 19

7 x 19

7 x 19

0.160

0.218

0.250

0.297

0.359

0.427

0.494

0.563

0.635

0.703

0.078

0.109

0.141

0.172

0.203

0.234

0.265

0.297

0.328

0.390

1.042

1.261

1.511

1.761

2.011

2.261

2.511

2.761

3.011

3.510

0.969

1.188

1.438

1.688

1.938

2.188

2.438

2.688

2.938

3.438

480

920

2,000

2,800

4,200

5,600

7,000

8,000

9,800

14,400

0.138

0.190

0.219

0.250

0.313

0.375

0.438

0.500

0.563

0.625

Wire
strands

Outside 
diameter

Bore
diameter

Bore
length

Swaging
length

Minimum breaking
strength (pounds)

Shank diameter *

*Use gauges in kit for checking diameters.

Figure 2-70. Straight shank terminal dimensions.

Figure 2-69. Gauging terminal shank dimension after swaging.

Bend cable, then push into swaging position

1

2

Figure 2-68. Insertion of cable into terminal.

• Inspect the terminal after swaging to determine that it 
is free of die marks and splits and is not out of round. 
Check the cable for slippage at the masking tape and 
for cut and broken wire strands.

• Using a go/no-go gauge supplied by the swaging 
tool manufacturer or a micrometer and swaging 
chart, check the terminal shank diameter for proper 
dimension. [Figures 2-69 and 2-70]

• Test the cable by proof-loading locally fabricated 
splices and newly installed swage terminal cable 
fittings for proper strength before installation. This 
is conducted by slowly applying a test load equal to 
60 percent of the rated breaking strength of the cable 
listed in Figure 2-71.

This load should be held for at least 3 minutes. Any testing 
of this type can be dangerous. Suitable guards should be 
placed over the cable during the test to prevent injury to 

personnel in the event of cable failure. If a proper test fixture 
is not available, the load test should be contracted out and 
performed by a properly equipped facility.

Cable Inspection
Aircraft cable systems are subject to a variety of environmental 
conditions and deterioration. Wire or strand breakage is easy 
to recognize visually. Other kinds of deterioration, such as 
wear, corrosion, and distortion, are not easily seen. Special 
attention should be given to areas where cables pass through 
battery compartments, lavatories, and wheel wells. These are 
prime areas for corrosion. Special attention should be given to 
critical fatigue areas. Those areas are defined as anywhere the 
cable runs over, under, or around a pulley, sleeve, or through 
a fairlead; or any section where the cable is flexed, rubbed, 
or within 1 foot of a swaged-on fitting. Close inspection in 
these critical fatigue areas can be performed by rubbing a rag 
along the cable. If there are any broken strands, the rag snags 
on the cable. A more detailed inspection can be performed 
in areas that may be corroded or indicate a fatigue failure by 
loosing or removing the cable and bending it. This technique 


2-43

Minimum Breaking Strength (Pounds)

Nominal diameter
of wire rope cable

110
270
480
480
920
920

1,760
2,400
3,700
5,000
6,400
7,800
9,000

12,000
16,300
22,800
28,500
35,000
49,600
66,500
85,400

106,400
129,400
153,600
180,500

360

700

1,300
2,000
2,900
3,800
4,900
6,100
7,600

11,000
14,900
19,300
24,300
30,100
42,900
58,000
75,200

Construction
Tolerance

on diameter 
(plus only)

Allowable
increase of
diameter 
at cut end

MIL-W-83420 
COMP B (CRES)

POUNDS

MIL-W-83420 
COMP A

POUNDS

MIL-C-18375 
(CRES)

POUNDS

110
270
480
480
920

1,000
2,000
2,800
4,200
5,000
6,400
7,800
9,800

12,500
14,400
17,600
22,800
28,500
35,000
49,600
66,500
85,400

106,400
129,400
153,600
180,500

0.006
0.008
0.009
0.009
0.010
0.010
0.011
0.017
0.019
0.020
0.021
0.023
0.024
0.025
0.027
0.030
0.033
0.036
0.039
0.045
0.048
0.050
0.054
0.057
0.060
0.062

0.006
0.008
0.010
0.010
0.012
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.020
0.022
0.024
0.026
0.030
0.033
0.036
0.039
0.045
0.048
0.050
0.054
0.057
0.060
0.062

3 x 7
7 x 7
7 x 7
7 x 19
7 x 7
7 x 19
7 x 19
7 x 19
7 x 19
7 x 19
7 x 19
7 x 19
7 x 19
7 x 19
7 x 19
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC
6 x 19 IWRC

 1/32
 3/64
 1/16
 1/16
 3/32
 3/32
 1/8
 5/32
 3/16
 7/32
 1/4
 9/32
 5/16
 11/32
 3/8
 7/16
 1/2
 9/16
 5/8
 3/4
 7/8
1
1 - 1/8
1 - 1/4
1 - 3/8
1 - 1/2

INCHES INCHES INCHES

Figure 2-71. Flexible cable construction.

Figure 2-72. Cable inspection technique.

reveals internal broken strands not readily apparent from the 
outside. [Figure 2-72]

Cable System Installation
Cable Guides

Pulleys are used to guide cables and also to change the direction 
of cable movement. Pulley bearings are sealed and need no 
lubrication other than the lubrication done at the factory. 
Brackets fastened to the structure of the aircraft support the 
pulleys. Cables passing over pulleys are kept in place by  
guards. The guards are close fitting to prevent jamming or 
to prevent the cables from slipping off when they slacken 
due to temperature variations. Pulleys should be examined to 
ensure proper lubrication; smooth rotation and freedom from 
abnormal cable wear patterns which can provide an indication 
of other problems in the cable system. [Figure 2-73]


2-44

Guard pin

Pulley

Bracket

Solid fairlead

Rubstrip

Split fairlead

Fairlead

Control cable

Bulkhead groove

BulkheadAir seal

Retaining rings

Pres
suriz

ed

Unpr
essu

rized

Figure 2-74. Cable guides.

Excessive cable tension Pully wear from misalignment

Pully too large for cable Cable misalignment

Frozen bearing Normal condition

Figure 2-73. Pulley wear patterns. 

Fairleads may be made from a nonmetallic material, such as 
phenolic, or a metallic material, such as soft aluminum. The 
fairlead completely encircles the cable where it passes through 
holes in bulkheads or other metal parts. Fairleads are used to 
guide cables in a straight line through or between structural 
members of the aircraft. Fairleads should never deflect the 
alignment of a cable more than 3° from a straight line.

Pressure seals are installed where cables (or rods) move 
through pressure bulkheads. The seal grips tightly enough 

to prevent excess air pressure loss but not enough to hinder 
movement of the cable. Pressure seals should be inspected 
at regular intervals to determine that the retaining rings are 
in place. If a retaining ring comes off, it may slide along the 
cable and cause jamming of a pulley. [Figure 2-74]

Travel Adjustment

Control surfaces should move a certain distance in either 
direction from the neutral position. These movements must 
be synchronized with the movement of the flight deck 
controls. The flight control system must be adjusted (rigged) 
to obtain these requirements. The tools for measuring surface 
travel primarily include protractors, rigging fixtures, contour 
templates, and rulers. These tools are used when rigging 
flight control systems to assure that the desired travel has 
been obtained. Generally speaking, the rigging consists of 
the following:

1. Positioning the flight control system in neutral and 
temporarily locking it there with rig pins or blocks;

2. Adjusting system cable tension and maintaining 
rudder, elevator, and ailerons in the neutral position; 
and

3. Adjusting the control stops to the aircraft manufacturer’s 
specifications.


2-45

0

20

40 60
80

100

120

Trigger

Pointer Lock

Anvil

AnvilRiser

Figure 2-75. Tensiometer.

Length (threads flush with ends of barrel)

Pin eyeBarrelSwaged terminal

Figure 2-76. Typical turnbuckle assembly.

Cable Tension

For the aircraft to operate as it was designed, the cable tension 
for the flight controls must be correct. To determine the 
amount of tension on a cable, a tensiometer is used. When 
properly maintained, a tensiometer is 98 percent accurate. 
Cable tension is determined by measuring the amount of force 
needed to make an offset in the cable between two hardened 
steel blocks called anvils. A riser or plunger is pressed against 
the cable to form the offset. Several manufacturers make 
a variety of tensiometers, each type designed for different 
kinds of cable, cable sizes, and cable tensions. [Figure 2-75]

Rigging Fixtures

Rigging fixtures and templates are special tools (gauges) 
designed by the manufacturer to measure control surface 
travel. Markings on the fixture or template indicate desired 
control surface travel.

Tension Regulators

Cable tension regulators are used in some flight control 
systems because there is considerable difference in 
temperature expansion of the aluminum aircraft structure 
and the steel control cables. Some large aircraft incorporate 
tension regulators in the control cable systems to maintain 
a given cable tension automatically. The unit consists of a 
compression spring and a locking mechanism that allows the 
spring to make correction in the system only when the cable 
system is in neutral.

Turnbuckles

A turnbuckle assembly is a mechanical screw device 
consisting of two threaded terminals and a threaded barrel. 
[Figure 2-76] Turnbuckles are fitted in the cable assembly 
for the purpose of making minor adjustments in cable length 
and for adjusting cable tension. One of the terminals has 
right-hand threads, and the other has left-hand threads. The 
barrel has matching right- and left-hand internal threads. The 
end of the barrel with the left-hand threads can usually be 
identified by a groove or knurl around that end of the barrel. 
When installing a turnbuckle in a control system, it is 

necessary to screw both of the terminals an equal number of 
turns into the barrel. It is also essential that all turnbuckle 
terminals be screwed into the barrel until not more than three 
threads are exposed on either side of the turnbuckle barrel. 
After a turnbuckle is properly adjusted, it must be safetied. 
There are a number of methods to safety a turnbuckle and/
or other types of swaged cable ends that are satisfactory. A 
double-wrap safety wire method is preferred.

Some turnbuckles are manufactured and designed to 
accommodate special locking devices. A typical unit is shown 
in Figure 2-77.

Cable Connectors

In addition to turnbuckles, cable connectors are used in some 
systems. These connectors enable a cable length to be quickly 
connected or disconnected from a system. Figure 2-78 
illustrates one type of cable connector in use.

Spring-Back

With a control cable properly rigged, the flight control should 
hit its stops at both extremes prior to the flight deck control. 


2-46

Spring connector

Locking-clipTurnbuckle body

Figure 2-77. Clip-type locking device and assembling in turnbuckle.

Figure 2-78. Spring-type connector. 

Adjustable rod end clevis

Tube

Adjustable antifriction rod end Rivets

Checknut Threaded rod end

Figure 2-79. Push rod. 

The spring-back is the small extra push that is needed for the 
flight deck control to hit its mechanical stop. 

Push Rods (Control Rods)
Push rods are used as links in the flight control system to 
give push-pull motion. They may be adjusted at one or both 

ends. Figure 2-79 shows the parts of a push rod. Notice that 
it consists of a tube with threaded rod ends. An adjustable 
antifriction rod end, or rod end clevis, attaches at each end 
of the tube. The rod end, or clevis, permits attachment of 
the tube to flight control system parts. The checknut, when 
tightened, prevents the rod end or clevis from loosening. 
They may have adjustments at one or both ends.

The rods should be perfectly straight, unless designed to be 
otherwise. When installed as part of a control system, the assembly 
should be checked for correct alignment and free movement. 
It is possible for control rods fitted with bearings to become 
disconnected because of failure of the peening that retains the  
ball races in the rod end. This can be avoided by installing 
the control rods so that the flange of the rod end is interposed 
between the ball race and the anchored end of the attaching 
pin or bolt as shown in Figure 2-80. 


2-47

Anchored end

Peening

Flange

Flange ends

Figure 2-80. Attached rod end.

Torque tube

Horn

Push-pull rod

Quadrant

Figure 2-81. Torque tube. 

DrumShaft

Control wheel

Bearing

Figure 2-82. Trim tab cable drum.

Another alternative is to place a washer, having a larger 
diameter than the hole in the flange, under the retaining nut 
on the end of the attaching pin or bolt. This retains the rod 
on the bolt in the event of a bearing failure.
 
Torque Tubes
Where an angular or twisting motion is needed in a control 
system, a torque tube is installed. Figure 2-81 shows how a 
torque tube is used to transmit motion in opposite directions. 

Cable Drums
Cable drums are used primarily in trim tab systems. As the trim 
tab control wheel is moved clockwise or counterclockwise, the 

cable drum winds or unwinds to actuate the trim tab cables. 
[Figure 2-82]


2-48

Rigging Checks
All aircraft assembly and rigging must be performed in 
accordance with the requirements prescribed by the specific 
aircraft and/or aircraft component manufacturer. Correctly 
following the procedures provides for proper operation 
of the components in regard to their mechanical and 
aerodynamic function and ensures the structural integrity 
of the aircraft. Rigging procedures are detailed in the 
applicable manufacturer’s maintenance or service manuals 
and applicable structural repair manuals. Additionally,  
aircraft specification or TCDS also provide information 
regarding control surface movement and weight and balance 
limits. 

The purpose of this section is to explain the methods of 
checking the relative alignment and adjustment of an aircraft’s 
main structural components. It is not intended to imply that the 
procedures are exactly as they may be in a particular aircraft. 
When rigging an aircraft, always follow the procedures and 
methods specified by the aircraft manufacturer. 

Structural Alignment
The position or angle of the main structural components is 
related to a longitudinal datum line parallel to the aircraft 
center line and a lateral datum line parallel to a line joining 
the wing tips. Before checking the position or angle of the 
main components, the aircraft must be jacked and leveled. 

Small aircraft usually have fixed pegs or blocks attached to 
the fuselage parallel to or coincident with the datum lines. 
A spirit level and a straight edge are rested across the pegs 
or blocks to check the level of the aircraft. This method of 
checking aircraft level also applies to many of the larger types 
of aircraft. However, the grid method is sometimes used on 
large aircraft. The grid plate is a permanent fixture installed 
on the aircraft floor or supporting structure. [Figure 2-83] 

When the aircraft is to be leveled, a plumb bob is suspended 
from a predetermined position in the ceiling of the aircraft 
over the grid plate. The adjustments to the jacks necessary to 
level the aircraft are indicated on the grid scale. The aircraft 
is level when the plumb bob is suspended over the center 
point of the grid. 

Certain precautions must be observed in all instances when 
jacking an aircraft. Normally, rigging and alignment checks 
should be performed in an enclosed hangar. If this cannot 
be accomplished, the aircraft should be positioned with the 
nose into the wind. 

The weight and loading of the aircraft should be exactly as 
described in the manufacturer’s manual. In all cases, the 
aircraft should not be jacked until it is determined that the 

maximum jacking weight (if applicable) specified by the 
manufacturer is not exceeded. 

With a few exceptions, the dihedral and incidence angles 
of conventional modern aircraft cannot be adjusted. Some 
manufacturers permit adjusting the wing angle of incidence 
to correct for a wing-heavy condition. The dihedral and 
incidence angles should be checked after hard landings or 
after experiencing abnormal flight loads to ensure that the 
components are not distorted and that the angles are within 
the specified limits. 

There are several methods for checking structural alignment 
and rigging angles. Special rigging boards that incorporate, 
or on which can be placed, a special instrument (spirit level 
or inclinometer) for determining the angle are used on some 
aircraft. On a number of aircraft, the alignment is checked 
using a transit and plumb bobs or a theodolite and sighting 
rods. The particular equipment to use is usually specified in 
the manufacturer’s maintenance manual. 

When checking alignment, a suitable sequence should be 
developed and followed to be certain that the checks are 
made at all the positions specified. The alignment checks 
specified usually include: 

• Wing dihedral angle

• Wing incidence angle

• Verticality of the fin

• Engine alignment

• A symmetry check

• Horizontal stabilizer incidence

• Horizontal stabilizer dihedral

Checking Dihedral

The dihedral angle should be checked in the specified 
positions using the special boards provided by the aircraft 
manufacturer. If no such boards are available, a straight edge 
and a inclinometer can be used. The methods for checking 
dihedral are shown in Figure 2-84. 

It is important that the dihedral be checked at the positions 
specified by the manufacturer. Certain portions of the wings 
or horizontal stabilizer may sometimes be horizontal or, on 
rare occasions, anhedral angles may be present. 

Checking Incidence

Incidence is usually checked in at least two specified 
positions on the surface of the wing to ensure that the wing 
is free from twist. A variety of incidence boards are used to 
check the incidence angle. Some have stops at the forward 


2-49

0

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

Nose up

Nose down

Pitch(deg)

R
ig

h
t 
w

in
g
 d

o
w

n

L
e
ft
 w

in
g
 d

o
w

n

R
o
ll 

(d
e
g
)

AFT
INBD

AFT

Plumb bob

Plumb bob attachment 

Plumb bob stowage clip 

Right main wheel wall AFT bulkhead

Grid plate

Figure 2-83. Grid plate installed.

Special dihedral board with 
spirit level incorporated

Straight edge and 
adjustable level

Figure 2-84. Checking dihedral. 


2-50

String or tape measure
lateral datum

Figure 2-86. Checking fin verticality.

Bubble level

Incidence board

Straight edge and adjustable level

Stop

Chord line

Figure 2-85. A typical incidence board.

edge, which must be placed in contact with the leading edge 
of the wing. Others are equipped with location pegs which 
fit into some specified part of the structure. The purpose in 
either case is to ensure that the board is fitted in exactly the 
position intended. In most instances, the boards are kept clear 
of the wing contour by short extensions attached to the board. 
A typical incidence board is shown in Figure 2-85. 

When used, the board is placed at the specified locations on 
the surface being checked. If the incidence angle is correct, 
a inclinometer on top of the board reads zero, or within a 
specified tolerance of zero. Modifications to the areas where 
incidence boards are located can affect the reading. For  
example, if leading edge deicer boots have been installed, 
the position of a board having a leading edge stop is affected.

Checking Fin Verticality

After the rigging of the horizontal stabilizer has been checked, 
the verticality of the vertical stabilizer relative to the lateral 
datum can be checked. The measurements are taken from a 

given point on either side of the top of the fin to a given point 
on the left and right horizontal stabilizers. [Figure 2-86] The 
measurements should be similar within prescribed limits. 
When it is necessary to check the alignment of the rudder 
hinges, remove the rudder and pass a plumb bob line through 
the rudder hinge attachment holes. The line should pass 
centrally through all the holes. It should be noted that some 
aircraft have the leading edge of the vertical fin offset to the 
longitudinal center line to counteract engine torque. 

Checking Engine Alignment

Engines are usually mounted with the thrust line parallel to 
the horizontal longitudinal plane of symmetry. However, this 
is not always true when the engines are mounted on the wings. 
Checking to ensure that the position of the engines, including 
any degree of offset is correct, depends largely on the type of 
mounting. Generally, the check entails a measurement from 
the center line of the mounting to the longitudinal center 
line of the fuselage at the point specified in the applicable 
manual. [Figure 2-87] 


2-51

Figure 2-87. Typical measurements used to check aircraft symmetry.

0

20

40 60
80

100

120

 No. 1 Riser No. 2 No. 3

 Diameter
1/16   3/32    1/8
12
19
25
31
36
41
46
51

16
23
30
36
42
48
54
60

21
29
36
43
50
57
63
69

30
40
50
60
70
80
90

100
110
120

12
17
22
26
30
34
38
42
46
50

20
26
32
37
42
47
52
56
60
64

5/32    3/16 7/32     1/4
Tension

(lb)

Trigger

Pointer lock

Anvil

AnvilRiser

Example

Figure 2-88. Cable tensiometer and sample conversion chart. 

Symmetry Check

The principle of a typical symmetry check is illustrated in 
Figure 2-87. The precise figures, tolerances, and checkpoints 
for a particular aircraft are found in the applicable service or 
maintenance manual. 

On small aircraft, the measurements between points are usually 
taken using a steel tape. When measuring long distances, it is 
suggested that a spring scale be used with the tape to obtain 
equal tension. A five-pound pull is usually sufficient. 

On large aircraft, the positions at which the dimensions are 
to be taken are usually chalked on the floor. This is done by 
suspending a plumb bob from the checkpoints and marking 
the floor immediately under the point of each plumb bob. 
The measurements are then taken between the centers of 
each marking.

Cable Tension
When it has been determined that the aircraft is symmetrical 
and structural alignment is within specifications, the cable 
tension and control surface travel can be checked. To 
determine the amount of tension on a cable, a tensiometer 
is used. When properly maintained, a tensiometer is 98 
percent accurate. Cable tension is determined by measuring 
the amount of force needed to make an offset in the cable 
between two hardened steel blocks called anvils. A riser or 
plunger is pressed against the cable to form the offset. Several 
manufacturers make a variety of tensiometers, each type 
designed for different kinds of cable, cable sizes, and cable 
tensions. One type of tensiometer is illustrated in Figure 2-88.


2-52

Temperature (°F)

R
ig

g
in

g
 lo

a
d
 (

lb
)

−70 −60 −50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160

340

320

300

280

260

240

220

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

1/4
 7 

x 1
9

3/1
6 7

 x 1
9

5/32
 7 x

 19

1/8 7 
x 19

3/32 7 x
 7

1/16 7 x 7

Ca
ble

 si
ze

Design limit rig load

Figure 2-89. Typical cable rigging chart. 

Following the manufacturer’s instructions, lower the trigger. 
Then, place the cable to be tested under the two anvils and 
close the trigger (move it up). Movement of the trigger pushes 
up the riser, which pushes the cable at right angles to the two 
clamping points under the anvils. The force that is required 
to do this is indicated by the dial pointer. As the sample chart 
beneath the illustration shows, different numbered risers are 
used with different size cables. Each riser has an identifying 
number and is easily inserted into the tensiometer.

Included with each tensiometer is a conversion chart, which is 
used to convert the dial reading to pounds. The dial reading is 
converted to pounds of tension as follows. Using a No. 2 riser 
to measure the tension of a 5/32" diameter cable, a reading of 
30 is obtained. The actual tension (see chart) of the cable is  
70 lbs. Referring to the chart, also notice that a No. 1 riser is 
used with 1/16", 3/32", and 1/8" cable. Since the tensiometer 
is not designed for use in measuring 7/32" or 1/4" cable, no 
values are shown in the No. 3 riser column of the chart. 

When actually taking a reading of cable tension in an aircraft, 
it may be difficult to see the dial. Therefore, a pointer lock 
is built in on the tensiometer. Push it in to lock the pointer, 

then remove the tensiometer from the cable and observe the 
reading. After observing the reading, pull the lock out and 
the pointer returns to zero.

Another variable that must be taken into account when 
adjusting cable tension is the ambient temperature of cable 
and the aircraft. To compensate for temperature variations, 
cable rigging charts are used when establishing cable tensions 
in flight control, landing gear, and other cable-operated 
systems. [Figure 2-89] 

To use the chart, determine the size of the cable that is to 
be adjusted and the ambient air temperature. For example, 
assume that the cable size is 1/8" diameter, which is a 7-19 
cable and the ambient air temperature is 85 °F. Follow the 
85 °F line upward to where it intersects the curve for 1/8" 
cable. Extend a horizontal line from the point of intersection 
to the right edge of the chart. The value at this point indicates 
the tension (rigging load in pounds) to establish on the cable. 
The tension for this example is 70 pounds.


2-53

30  20  10   0   10  20  30

 10      0     10

Disk degree scale

Ring vernier scale

Disk-to-ring lock on ring engages only 
when zeros on scales are aligned.

Ring adjuster

Center spirit level

Disk adjuster Ring

Ring-to-frame lockCorner spirit level 
on frame folded in

Disk

Figure 2-90. Universal propeller protractor. 

Control Surface Travel
In order for a control system to function properly, it must 
be correctly adjusted. Correctly rigged control surfaces 
move through a prescribed arc (surface-throw) and are 
synchronized with the movement of the flight deck controls. 
Rigging any control system requires that the aircraft 
manufacturer’s instructions be followed as outlined in their 
maintenance manual.

Therefore, the explanations in this chapter are limited to the 
three general steps listed below: 

1. Lock the flight deck control, bellcranks, and the 
control surfaces in the neutral position. 

2. Adjust the cable tension, maintaining the rudder, 
elevators, or ailerons in the neutral position. 

3. Adjust the control stops to limit the control surface 
travel to the dimensions given for the aircraft being 
rigged. 

The range of movement of the controls and control 
surfaces should be checked in both directions from neutral. 
There are various tools used for measuring surface travel, 
including protractors, rigging fixtures, contour templates, 
and rulers. These tools are used when rigging flight control 
systems to ensure that the aircraft is properly rigged and 
the manufacturer’s specifications have been complied with. 

Rigging fixtures and contour templates are special tools 
(gauges) designed by the manufacturer to measure control 
surface travel. Markings on the fixture or template indicate 
desired control surface travel. In many instances, the aircraft 
manufacturer gives the travel of a particular control surface 
in degrees and inches. If the travel in inches is provided, a 
ruler can be used to measure surface travel in inches.

Protractors are tools for measuring angles in degrees. Various 
types of protractors are used to determine the travel of flight 
control surfaces. One protractor that can be used to measure 
aileron, elevator, or wing flap travel is the universal propeller 
protractor shown in Figure 2-90.

This protractor is made up of a frame, disk, ring, and two 
spirit levels. The disk and ring turn independently of each 
other and of the frame. (The center spirit level is used to 
position the frame vertically when measuring propeller 
blade angle.) The center spirit level is used to position the 
disk when measuring control surface travel. A disk-to-ring 
lock is provided to secure the disk and ring together when 
the zero on the ring vernier scale and the zero on the disk 
degree scale align. The ring-to-frame lock prevents the ring 
from moving when the disk is moved. Note that they start at 

the same point and advance in opposite directions. A double 
10-part vernier is marked on the ring. 

The rigging of the trim tab systems is performed in a similar 
manner. The trim tab control is set to the neutral (no trim) 
position, and the surface tab is usually adjusted to streamline 
with the control surface. However, on some aircraft, the 
specifications may require that the trim tabs be offset a degree 
or two from streamline when in the neutral position. After 
the tab and tab control are in the neutral position, adjust the 
control cable tension. 

Pins, usually called rig pins, are sometimes used to simplify 
the setting of pulleys, levers, bellcranks, etc., in their neutral 
positions. A rig pin is a small metallic pin or clip. When rig 
pins are not provided, the neutral positions can be established 
by means of alignment marks, by special templates, or by 
taking linear measurements. 

If the final alignment and adjustment of a system are correct, 
it should be possible to withdraw the rigging pins easily. Any 
undue tightness of the pins in the rigging holes indicates 
incorrect tensioning or misalignment of the system.


2-54

Screwheads • Double-twist method

External snapring • Single-wire method

Small screw in closely spaced closed 
geometrical pattern • Single-twist method

Single-fastener application • Double-twist method

Bolt heads

Castle nuts

Figure 2-91. Double-wrap and single safety wire methods for nuts, 
bolts, and snap rings.

After a system has been adjusted, the full and synchronized 
movement of the controls should be checked. When checking 
the range of movement of the control surface, the controls 
must be operated from the flight deck and not by moving 
the control surfaces. During the checking of control surface 
travel, ensure that chains, cables, etc., have not reached 
the limit of their travel when the controls are against their 
respective stops.
 
Adjustable and nonadjustable stops (whichever the case 
requires) are used to limit the throw-range or travel movement 
of the ailerons, elevator, and rudder. Usually there are two 
sets of stops for each of the three main control surfaces. One 
set is located at the control surface, either in the snubber 
cylinders or as structural stops; the other, at the flight deck 
control. Either of these may serve as the actual limit stop. 
However, those situated at the control surface usually perform 
this function. The other stops do not normally contact each 
other, but are adjusted to a definite clearance when the 
control surface is at the full extent of its travel. These work 
as override stops to prevent stretching of cables and damage 
to the control system during violent maneuvers. When rigging 
control systems, refer to the applicable maintenance manual 
for the sequence of steps for adjusting these stops to limit the 
control surface travel. 

Where dual controls are installed, they must be synchronized 
and function satisfactorily when operated from both positions. 

Trim tabs and other tabs should be checked in a manner 
similar to the main control surfaces. The tab position 
indicator must be checked to see that it functions correctly. 
If jackscrews are used to actuate the trim tab, check to see 
that they are not extended beyond the specified limits when 
the tab is in its extreme positions. 

After determining that the control system functions properly 
and is correctly rigged, it should be thoroughly inspected to 
determine that the system is correctly assembled and operates 
freely over the specified range of movement. 

Checking and Safetying the System
Whenever rigging is performed on any aircraft, it is good 
practice to have a second set of eyes inspect the control 
system to make certain that all turnbuckles, rod ends, and 
attaching nuts and bolts are correctly safetied.

As a general rule, all fasteners on an aircraft are safetied in 
some manner. Safetying is defined as securing by various 
means any nut, bolt, turnbuckle, etc., on the aircraft so that 
vibration does not cause it to loosen during operation.


2-55

To lock jaws

Pull knob to twist wire
Plier handles will spin

when knob is pulled

Outer sleeve

Figure 2-92. Use of safety-wire pliers or wire twisters. 

Most aircraft manufacturers have a Standard Practices section 
in their maintenance manuals. These are the methods that 
should be used when working on a particular system of a 
specific aircraft. However, most standard aircraft hardware 
has a standard method of being safetied. The following 
information provides some of the most common methods 
used in aircraft safetying. 

The most commonly used safety wire method is the double-
twist, utilizing stainless steel or Monel wire in the .032 to 
.040-inch diameter range. This method is used on studs, cable 
turnbuckles, flight controls, and engine accessory attaching 
bolts. A single-wire method is used on smaller screws, bolts, 
and/or nuts when they are located in a closely spaced or 
closed geometrical pattern. The single-wire method is also 
used on electrical components and in places that are difficult 
to reach. [Figure 2-91]

Safety-of-flight emergency equipment, such as portable fire 
extinguishers, oxygen regulators, emergency valves, firewall 
shut-offs, and seals on first-aid kits, are safetied using a 
single copper wire (.020-inch diameter) or aluminum wire 
(.031-inch diameter). The wire on this emergency equipment 
is installed only to indicate the component is sealed or has 
not been actuated. It must be possible to break the wire seal 
by hand, without the use of any tools. 

The use of safety wire pliers, or wire twisters, makes the 
job of safetying much easier on the mechanic’s hands and 
produces a better finished product. [Figure 2-92]

The wire should have six to eight twists per inch of wire and 
be pulled taut while being installed. Where practicable, install 
the safety wire around the head of the fastener and twist it in 
such a manner that the loop of the wire is pulled close to the 
contour of the unit being safety wired, and in the direction that 
would have the tendency to tighten the fastener. [Figure 2-93]

Cotter pins are used to secure such items as bolts, screws, 
pins, and shafts. They are used at any location where a turning 
or actuating movement takes place. The diameter of the cotter 
pin selected for any application should be the largest size that 
will fit consistent with the diameter of the cotter pin hole and/ 
or the slots in the castellated nut. Cotter pins, like safety wire, 
should never be re-used on aircraft. [Figure 2-94]

Self-locking nuts are used in applications where they are 
not removed often. There are two types of self-locking nuts 
currently in use. One is all metal and the other has an insert, 
usually of fiber or nylon. 

It is extremely important that the manufacturer’s Illustrated 
Parts Book (IPB) be consulted for the correct type and 
grade of lock nut for various locations on the aircraft. 
The finish or plating color of the nut identifies the type of 
application and environment in which it can be used. For 
example, a cadmium-plated nut is gold in color and provides 
exceptionally good protection against corrosion, but should 
not be used in applications where the temperature may 
exceed 450 °F.

Repeated removal and installation causes the self-locking nut 
to lose its locking feature. They should be replaced when they 
are no longer capable of maintaining the minimum prevailing 
torque. [Figure 2-95]

Lock washers may be used with bolts and machine screws 
whenever a self-locking nut or castellated nut is not 
applicable. They may be of the split washer spring type, or 
a multi-serrated internal or external star washer.

Pal nuts may be a second nut tightened against the first and 
used to force the primary nut thread against the bolt or screw
thread. They may also be of the type that are made of stamped 
spring steel and are to be used only once and replaced with 
new ones when removed.

Biplane Assembly and Rigging
Biplanes were some of the very first aircraft designs. The 
first powered heavier-than-air aircraft, the Wright Brothers’ 
Wright Flyer, successfully flown on December 17, 1903, 
was a biplane. 


2-56

Examples apply to all types of bolts, fillister-head 
screws, square-head plugs, and other similar parts 
which are wired so that the loosening tendency of 
either part is counteracted by tightening of the other 
part. The direction of twist from the second to the 
third unit is counterclockwise in examples to keep the 
loop in position against the head of the bolt. The wire 
entering the hole in the third unit is the lower 
wire, and by making a counterclockwise twist after it 
leaves the hole, the loop is secured in place 
around the head of that bolt.

Example shows methods for wiring various standard items.

NOTE: Wire may be wrapped over the unit rather than around it when wiring 
castellated nuts or on other items when there is clearance problem.

Coupling nuts on a tee shall be wired, as shown
above, so that tension is always in the tightening
direction.

Coupling nuts attached to straight connectors shall be wired as shown when hex
is an integral part of the connector.

Correct application of 
single wire to closely
spaced multiple group.

Fittings incorporating wire lugs shall be wired as shown in 7 and 8. Where no lock-wire lug is 
provided, wire should be applied as shown in 9 and 10 with caution being exerted to ensure that 
wire is wrapped tightly around the fitting.

Example 3Example 1 Example 2

Example 8

Example 4

Example 9

Example 5

Example 10

Example 10

Example 6

Example 6

Example 7

Figure 2-93. Examples of various fasteners and methods of safetying.


2-57

 Fine Thread Series

 Thread Size

7/16 - 20
1/2 - 20

9/16 - 18
5/8 - 18
3/4 - 16
7/8 - 14

1 - 14
1-1/8 - 12
1-1/4 - 12

8 inch-pounds
10 inch-pounds
13 inch-pounds
18 inch-pounds
27 inch-pounds
40 inch-pounds
55 inch-pounds
73 inch-pounds
94 inch-pounds

Minimum Prevailing Torque

Coarse Thread Series

 Thread Size

7/16 - 14
1/2 - 13

9/16 - 12
5/8 - 11
3/4 - 10
7/8 - 9  

1 - 8  
1-1/8 - 8  
1-1/4 - 8  

8 inch-pounds
10 inch-pounds
14 inch-pounds
20 inch-pounds
27 inch-pounds
40 inch-pounds
51 inch-pounds
68 inch-pounds
68 inch-pounds

Minimum Prevailing Torque

Figure 2-95. Minimum prevailing torque values for reused self-
locking unts. 

Figure 2-94. Securing hardware with cotter pins. 

90°

90°

B1C1 C2B2D1 D2

A2A1

Firewall centerline

Select easy-to-identify 
points from which to 
cross-measure.

Reference point

Vertical tail post (reference)

Note

• Make cross-
 measurements with a 50' 
 steel tape.
• Ideally, distances on 
 both sides should match.
 (A1-A2 / B1-B2, etc.)

Top view

Rear view

Figure 2-96. Checking aircraft symmetry. 

The first biplanes were designed with very thin wing 
sections and, consequently, the wing structure needed to 
be strengthened by external bracing wires. The biplane 
configuration allowed the two wings to be braced against 
one another, increasing the structural strength. When the 
assembly and rigging of a biplane is accomplished in 
accordance with the approved instructions, a stable airworthy 
aircraft is the result. 

Whether assembling an early model vintage aircraft that 
may have been disassembled for repair and restoration, or 
constructing and assembling a new aircraft, the following are 
some basic alignment procedures to follow.

To start, the fuselage must be level, fore and aft and laterally. 
The aircraft usually has specific leveling points designated 
by the manufacturer or indicated on the plans. The fuselage 
should be blocked up off the landing gear so it is stable. A 
center line should be drawn on the floor the length of the 
fuselage and another line perpendicular to it at the firewall, 
for use as an additional alignment reference. 

With the horizontal and vertical tail surfaces installed, the 
incident angle for the horizontal stabilizer should be set. 
The tail brace wires should be connected and tightened until 
the slack is removed. Alignment measurements should be 
checked as shown in Figure 2-96.


2-58

90°

90°

90°

CENTER SECTION

 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

Distance “Y” 
same both sides

Straight edge - 
clamp to firewall

Fuselage centerline

Level

Top view

Front view

Z Z

X X

Plumb bob

Ruler
Distance 
“X” same
both sides

Both tie rods “Z” 
same length

Figure 2-97. Center section alignment.

Plumb bob

Stagger measured in inches

Level aircraft

Plumb line

Ruler

Plumb bob

Stagger Lower wing hinge fittings

Spar

Note:
A 1" rise in 57" equals one degree of dihedral

Depicted an
gle 4°

Measure upper wing dihedal

Dihedal
board

Spirit
level

Lower wing 
dihedal in inches

Measuring dihedral (in inches)

Measuring dihedral (angles)

To increase 
dihedral shorten

landing wires

Plumb bobs
or weights

Wood blocks
(2" x 4")

X1 X2

X1 X2

Upper wing with 0° dihedal - 
string must touch blocks

Landing
wires

4°4°

can also use 
dihedal board

with a level

Plumb bobs
or weights

Use straight edge
and bevel protractor

4°

57"

Figure 2-99. Measuring dihedral. 

Figure 2-98. Measuring stagger.

Install the elevator and rudder and clamp them in a neutral 
position. Verify the neutral position of the control stick 
and rudder pedals in the flight deck and secure them in 
order to simplify the connecting and final tensioning of 
the control cables.

If the biplane has a center section for the upper wing, it 
must be aligned as accurately as possible, because even the 
smallest error is compounded at the wing tip. Applicable 
cables and turnbuckles should be connected and the tension 
set as specified. [Figure 2-97] The stagger measurement can 
be checked as shown in Figure 2-98. 

The lower wing sections should be individually attached to 
the fuselage and blocked up for support while the landing 
wires are connected and adjusted to obtain the dihedral called 
for in the specifications or plans. [Figure 2-99] 


2-59

Wing
Incidence angle

Measurement for 
angle of incidence

Use straight edge for flat 
bottom airfoils (clark Y 
series, etc.)

1

Bevel protractor

Plywood

Chord line
Make bottom
parallel with

chord line
Make rib template to measure

incidence of acrobatic type wings

Aircraft must be level when checking incidence

Straight edge
Level
aircraft

Chock wheels

Spirit
level

2

Figure 2-100. Checking incidence.

Next, connect the outer “N” struts to the left and right sections 
of the lower wing. Now, the upper wing can be attached and 
the flying wires installed. The slave struts can be installed 
and the ailerons connected using the same alignment and 
adjustment procedures used for the elevator and rudder. The 
incidence angle can be checked, as shown in Figure 2-100.

Once this point is reached, it is a matter of measuring, 
checking angles, and adjusting the various components to 
obtain the overall aircraft symmetry and desired alignment, 
as shown in Figure 2-96.

Also, remember that care should be used when tightening 
the wing wires because extra stress can be inadvertently 
induced into the wings. Always loosen one wire before 
tightening the opposite wire. Flying and landing wires are 
typically set at about 600 pounds and tail brace wires at 
about 300 pounds of tension. 

When convinced the aircraft is properly rigged, move away 
from it and take a good look at the finished product. Are the 
wings symmetrical? Does the dihedral look even? Is the tail 
section square with the fuselage? Are the wing attaching 
hardware, flying wires, and control cables safetied? And 
the final task, before the first flight, is to complete the 
maintenance record entries. 

As with any aircraft maintenance or repair, the instructions 
and specifications from the manufacturer, or the procedures 
and recommendations found in the construction plans, should 
be the primary method to perform the assembly and rigging 
of the aircraft.  

Aircraft Inspection
Purpose of Inspection Programs 
The purpose of an aircraft inspection program is to ensure that 
the aircraft is airworthy. The term airworthy is not defined 
in the 14 CFR. However, case law relating to the term and 
regulations for the issuance of a standard airworthiness 
certificate reveal two conditions that must be met for the 
aircraft to be considered airworthy: 

1. The aircraft must conform to its type design or 
properly altered condition. Conformity to type design 
is considered attained when the aircraft configuration 
and the components installed are consistent with 
the drawings, specifications, and other data that are 
part of the TC, which includes any supplemental 
type certificate (STC) and field approved alterations 
incorporated into the aircraft.

2. The aircraft must be in a condition for safe operation. 
This refers to the condition of the aircraft relative to 
wear and deterioration (e.g., skin corrosion, window 
delamination/crazing, fluid leaks, and tire wear 
beyond specified limits).

When flight hours and calendar time are accumulated into 
the life of an aircraft, some components wear out and others 
deteriorate. Inspections are developed to find these items, and 
repair or replace them before they affect the airworthiness 
of the aircraft.

Perform an Airframe Conformity and 
Airworthiness Inspection
To establish conformity of an aircraft product, start with a 
TCDS. This document is a formal description of the aircraft, 
the engine, or the propeller. It is issued by the Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) when they find that the 
product meets the applicable requirements for certification 
under 14 CFR.

The TCDS lists the limitations and information required 
for type certification of aircraft. It includes the certification 
basis and eligible serial numbers for the product. It lists 
airspeed limits, weight limits, control surface movements, 
engine make and models, minimum crew, fuel type, etc.; the 
horsepower and rpm limits, thrust limitations, size and weight 
for engines; and blade diameter, pitch, etc., for propellers. 


2-60

Additionally, it provides all the various components by make 
and model, eligible for installation on the applicable product.

A manufacturer’s maintenance information may be in the 
form of service instructions, service bulletins, or service 
letters that the manufacturer publishes to provide instructions 
for product improvement or to revise and update maintenance 
manuals. Service bulletins are not regulatory unless:

1. All or a portion of a service bulletin is incorporated 
as part of an airworthiness directive.

2. The service bulletins are part of the FAA-approved 
airworthiness limitations section of the manufacturer’s 
manual or part of the type certificate.

3. The service bulletins are incorporated directly or by 
reference into an FAA-approved inspection program, 
such as an approved aircraft inspection program 
(AAIP) or continuous aircraft maintenance program 
(CAMP).

4. The service bulletins are listed as an additional 
maintenance requirement in a certificate holder’s 
operations specifications (Op Specs).

 
Airworthiness directives (ADs) are published by the FAA 
as amendments to 14 CFR part 39, section 39.13. They 
apply to the following products: aircraft, aircraft engines, 
propellers, and appliances. The FAA issues airworthiness 
directives when an unsafe condition exists in a product, and 
the condition is likely to exist or develop in other products 
of the same type design.

To perform the airframe conformity and verify the 
airworthiness of the aircraft, records must be checked and 
the aircraft inspected. The data plate on the airframe is 
inspected to verify its make, model, serial number, type 
certificate, or production certificate. Check the registration 
and airworthiness certificate to verify they are correct and 
reflect the “N” number on the aircraft.

Inspect aircraft records. Check current inspection status of 
aircraft, by verifying:

• The date of the last inspection and aircraft total time 
in service.

• The type of inspection and if it includes manufacturer’s 
bulletins. 

• The signature, certificate number, and the type of 
certificate of the person who returned the aircraft to 
service.

Identify if any major alterations or major repairs have been 
performed and recorded on an FAA Form 337, Major Repair 

and Alteration. Review any flight manual supplements 
(FMS) included in the Pilot’s Operating Handbook (POH)
and determine if there are any airworthiness limitations or 
required placards associated with the installation(s) that must 
be inspected.

Check for a current weight and balance report, and the current 
equipment list, current status of airworthiness directives for 
airframe, engine, propeller, and appliances. Also, check the 
limitations section of the manufacturer’s manual to verify 
the status of any life-limited components.

Obtain the latest revision of the airframe TCDS and use it 
as a verification document to inspect and ensure the correct 
engines, propellers, and components are installed on the 
airframe. 

Required Inspections
Preflight
Preflight for the aircraft is described in the POH for that 
specific aircraft and should be followed with the same 
attention given to the checklists for takeoff, inflight, and 
landing checklists. 
 
Periodic Maintenance Inspections
Annual Inspection

With few exceptions, no person may operate an aircraft 
unless, within the preceding 12 calendar months, it has had 
an annual inspection in accordance with 14 CFR part 43 and 
was approved for return to service by a person authorized 
under section 43.7. (A certificated mechanic with an Airframe 
and Powerplant (A&P) rating must hold an inspection 
authorization (IA) to perform an annual inspection.) A 
checklist must be used and include as a minimum, the scope 
and detail of items (as applicable to the particular aircraft) in 
14 CFR part 43, Appendix D.

100-hour Inspection

This inspection is required when an aircraft is operated under 
14 CFR part 91 and used for hire, such as flight training. It 
is required to be performed every 100 hours of service in 
addition to the annual inspection. (The inspection may be 
performed by a certificated mechanic with an A&P rating.) 
A checklist must be used and as a minimum, the inspection 
must include the scope and detail of items (as applicable to 
the particular aircraft) in 14 CFR part 43, Appendix D.
  
Progressive Inspection

This inspection program can be performed under 14 CFR 
part 91, section 91.409(d), as an alternative to an annual 
inspection. However, the program requires that a written 


2-61

request be submitted by the registered owner or operator 
of an aircraft desiring to use a progressive inspection to the 
local FAA Flight Standards District Office (FSDO). It shall 
provide:

1. The name of a certificated mechanic holding an 
inspection authorization, a certificated airframe repair 
station, or the manufacturer of the aircraft to supervise 
or conduct the inspection. 

2. A current inspection procedures manual available and 
readily understandable to the pilot and maintenance 
personnel containing in detail:

• An explanation of the progressive inspection, 
including the continuity of inspection 
responsibility, the making of reports, and the 
keeping of records and technical reference 
material.

• An inspection schedule, specifying the intervals 
in hours or days when routine and detailed 
inspections will be performed, and including 
instructions for exceeding an inspection interval 
by not more than 10 hours while en route, and 
for changing an inspection interval because of 
service experience.

• Sample routine and detailed inspection forms and 
instructions for their use.

• Sample reports and records and instructions for 
their use.

3. Enough housing and equipment for necessary 
disassembly and proper inspection of the aircraft.

4. Appropriate current technical information for the 
aircraft.

The frequency and detail of the progressive inspection 
program shall provide for the complete inspection of the 
aircraft within each 12 calendar months and be consistent with 
the manufacturer’s recommendations and kind of operation 
in which the aircraft is engaged. The progressive inspection 
schedule must ensure that the aircraft will be airworthy 
at all times. A certificated A&P mechanic may perform a 
progressive inspection, as long as he or she is being supervised 
by a mechanic holding an Inspection Authorization.

If the progressive inspection is discontinued, the owner or 
operator must immediately notify the local FAA FSDO in 
writing. After discontinuance, the first annual inspection 
will be due within 12 calendar months of the last complete 
inspection of the aircraft under the progressive inspection.

Large Airplanes (over 12,500 lb)

Inspection requirements of 14 CFR part 91, section 91.409, 
to include paragraphs (e) and (f).

Paragraph (e) applies to large airplanes (to which 14 CFR 
part 125 is not applicable), turbojet multiengine airplanes, 
turbo propeller powered multiengine airplanes, and turbine-
powered rotorcraft. Paragraph (f) lists the inspection 
programs that can be selected under paragraph (e).

The additional inspection requirements for these aircraft are 
placed on the operator because the larger aircraft typically 
are more complex and require a more detailed inspection 
program than is provided for in 14 CFR part 43, Appendix D. 

An inspection program must be selected from one of the 
following four options by the owner or operator of the aircraft:

1. A continuous airworthiness inspection program that 
is part of a continuous airworthiness maintenance 
program currently in use by a person holding an air 
carrier operating certificate or an operating certificate 
issued under 14 CFR part 121 or 135.

2. An approved aircraft inspection program approved 
under 14 CFR part 135, section 135.419, and currently 
in use by a person holding an operating certificate 
issued under 14 CFR part 135.

3. A current inspection program recommended by the 
manufacturer.

4. Any other inspection program established by the 
registered owner or operator of the airplane or turbine-
powered rotorcraft and approved by the FAA. This 
program must be submitted to the local FAA FSDO 
having jurisdiction of the area in which the aircraft is 
based. The program must be in writing and include at 
least the following information:

(a) Instructions and procedures for the conduct of 
inspections for the particular make and model 
airplane or turbine-powered rotorcraft, including 
the necessary tests and checks. The instructions 
and procedures must set forth in detail the parts 
and areas of the airframe, engines, propellers, 
rotors, and appliances, including survival and 
emergency equipment, required to be inspected.

(b) A schedule for performing the inspections that 
must be performed under the program expressed 
in terms of the time in service, calendar time, 
number of system operations (cycles), or any 
combination of these.


2-62

 This FAA approved owner/operator program can 
be revised at a future date by the FAA, if they 
find that revisions are necessary for the continued 
adequacy of the program. The owner/operator can 
petition the FAA within 30 days of notification 
to reconsider the notice to make changes.

Manufacturer’s Inspection Program

This is a program developed by the manufacturer for their 
product. It is contained in the “Instructions for Continued 
Airworthiness” required under 14 CFR part 23, section 23.1529 
and part 25, section 25.1529. It is in the form of a manual, or 
manuals as appropriate, for the quantity of data to be provided 
and including, but not limited to, the following content:

• A description of the airplane and its systems and 
installations, including its engines, propellers, and 
appliances.

• Basic information describing how the airplane 
components and systems are controlled and operated, 
including any special procedures and limitations that 
apply.

• Servicing information that covers servicing points, 
capacities of tanks, reservoirs, types of fluids to be 
used, pressures applicable to the various systems, 
lubrication points, lubricants to be used, equipment 
required for servicing, tow instructions, mooring, 
jacking, and leveling information.

• Maintenance instructions with scheduling information 
for the airplane and each component that provides 
the recommended periods at which they should be 
cleaned, inspected, adjusted, tested, and lubricated, 
and the degree of inspection and work recommended 
at these periods.

• The recommended overhaul periods and necessary 
cross references to the airworthiness limitations 
section of the manual.

• The inspection program that details the frequency and 
extent of the inspections necessary to provide for the 
continued airworthiness of the airplane.

• Diagrams of structural access plates and information 
needed to gain access for inspections when access 
plates are not provided.

• Details for the application of special inspection 
techniques, including radiographic and ultrasonic 
testing where such processes are specified.

• A list of special tools needed.

• An Airworthiness Limitations section that is 
segregated and clearly distinguishable from the rest 
of the document. This section must set forth—

1. Each mandatory replacement time, structural 
inspection interval, and related structural inspection 
procedures required for type certification or 
approved under 14 CFR part 23 or part 25.

2. Each mandatory replacement time, inspection 
interval, related inspection procedure, and all 
critical design configuration control limitations 
approved under 14 CFR part 23 or part 25, for 
the fuel tank system.

The Airworthiness Limitations section must contain a 
legible statement in a prominent location that reads: “The 
Airworthiness Limitations section is FAA-approved and 
specifies maintenance required under 14 CFR part 43, 
sections 43.16 and part 91, section 91.403, unless an 
alternative program has been FAA-approved.”

Any operator who wishes to adopt a manufacturers’ 
inspection program should first contact their local FAA Flight 
Standards District Office, for further guidance.

Altimeter and Static System Inspections in Accordance 
with 4 CFR Part 91, Section 91.411
Any person operating an airplane or helicopter in controlled 
airspace under instrument flight rules (IFR) must have had, 
within the preceding 24 calendar months, each static pressure 
system, each altimeter instrument, and each automatic 
pressure altitude reporting system tested and inspected and 
found to comply with 14 CFR part 43, Appendix E. Those 
test and inspections must be conducted by appropriately rated 
persons under 14 CFR.

Air Traffic Control (ATC) Transponder Inspections
Any person using an air traffic control (ATC) transponder 
must have had, within the preceding 24 calendar months, that 
transponder tested and inspected and found to comply with 
14 CFR part 43, Appendix F, and part 91, section 91.411. 
Additionally, following any installation or maintenance on 
an ATC transponder where data correspondence error could 
be introduced, the integrated system must be tested and 
inspected and found to comply with 14 CFR part part 43, 
Appendix E, and part 91, section 91.411 by an appropriately 
person under 14 CFR.

Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) Operational 
and Maintenance Practices in Accordance With 
Advisory Circular (AC) 91-44 
This AC combined and updated several ACs on the subject 
of ELTs and receivers for airborne service. 

Under the operating rules of 14 CFR part 91, most small U.S. 
registered civil airplanes equipped to carry more than one 


2-63

person must have an ELT attached to the airplane. 14 CFR 
part 91, section 91.207 defines the requirements of what type 
aircraft and when the ELT must be installed. It also states that 
an ELT that meets the requirements of Technical Standard 
Order (TSO)-C91 may not be used for new installations.

The pilot in command of an aircraft equipped with an ELT is 
responsible for its operation and, prior to engine shutdown at 
the end of each flight, should tune the VHF receiver to 121.5 
MHz and listen for ELT activations. Maintenance personnel 
are responsible for accidental activation during the actual 
period of their work.

Maintenance of ELTs is subject to 14 CFR part 43 and 
part 91, section 91.413 and should be included in the 
required inspections. It is essential that the impact switch 
operation and the transmitter output be checked using the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Testing of an ELT prior to 
installation or for maintenance reasons, should be conducted 
in a metal enclosure in order to avoid outside radiation by the 
transmitter. If this is not possible, the test should be conducted 
only within the first 5 minutes after any hour.

Manufacturers of ELTs are required to mark the expiration 
date of the battery, based on 50 percent of the useful life, on 
the outside of the transmitter. The batteries are required to be 
replaced on that date or when the transmitter has been in use 
for more than 1 cumulative hour. Water activated batteries, 
have virtually unlimited shelf life. They are not usually 
marked with an expiration date. They must be replaced after 
activation regardless of how long they were in service.

The battery replacement can be accomplished by a pilot on 
a portable type ELT that is readily accessible and can be 
removed and reinstalled in the aircraft by a simple operation. 
That would be considered preventive maintenance under 
14 CFR part 43, section 43.3(g). Replacement batteries 
should be approved for the specific model of ELT and the 
installation performed in accordance with section 43.13. 

AC 91-44 also contains additional information on:

• Airborne homing and alerting equipment for use with 
ELTs.

• Search and rescue responsibility.

• Alert and search procedures including various flight 
procedures for locating an ELT.

• The FAA Frequency Management Offices, for 
contacting by manufacturers when they are 
demonstrating and testing ELTs.

Although there is no regulatory requirement to install a 406 
ELT, the benefits are numerous, regardless of regulatory 

minimums. All new installations must be a 406 MHz digital 
ELT. It must meet the standards of TSO C126. When 
installed, the new 406 MHz ELT should be registered so that 
if the aircraft were to go down, search and rescue could take 
full advantage of the benefits the system offers. The digital 
circuitry of the 406 ELT can be coded with information about 
the aircraft type, base location, ownership, etc. This coding 
allows the search and rescue (SAR) coordinating centers to 
contact the registered owner or operator if a signal is detected 
to determine if the aircraft is flying or parked. This type of 
identification permits a rapid SAR response in the event of 
an accident, and will save valuable resources from a false 
alarm search.

Annual and 100-Hour Inspections
Preparation 
An owner/operator bringing an aircraft into a maintenance 
facility for an annual or 100-hour inspection may not know 
what is involved in the process. This is the point at which 
the person who performs the inspection sits down with the 
customer to review the records and discuss any maintenance 
issues, repairs needed, or additional work the customer may 
want done. Moreover, the time spent on these items before 
starting the inspection usually saves time and money before 
the work is completed. 

The work order describes the work that will be performed 
and the fee that the owner pays for the service. It is a contract 
that includes the parts, materials, and labor to complete the 
inspection. It may also include additional maintenance and 
repairs requested by the owner or found during the inspection. 

Additional materials such as ADs, manufacturer’s service 
bulletins and letters, and vendor service information must be 
researched to include the avionics and emergency equipment 
on the aircraft. The TCDS provides all the components 
eligible for installation on the aircraft.

The review of the aircraft records is one of the most important 
parts of any inspection. Those records provide the history 
of the aircraft. The records to be kept and how they are to 
be maintained are listed in 14 CFR part 91, section 91.417. 
Among those records that must be tracked are records of 
maintenance, preventive maintenance, and alteration, records 
of the last 100-hour, annual, or other required or approved 
inspections for the airframe, engine propeller, rotor, and 
appliances of an aircraft. The records must include:

• A description (or reference to data acceptable to the 
FAA) of the work performed. 

• The date of completion of the work performed and 
the signature and certificate number of the person 
approving the aircraft for return to service.


2-64

• The total time in service and the current status of 
life-limited parts of the airframe, each engine, each 
propeller, and each rotor.

• The time since last overhaul of all items installed on 
the aircraft which are required to be overhauled on a 
specified time basis.

• The current inspection status of the aircraft, including 
the time since last inspection required by the program 
under which the aircraft and its appliances are 
maintained.

• The current status of applicable ADs including for 
each, the method of compliance, the AD number, and 
revision date. If the AD involves recurring action, the 
time and date when the next action is required. 

• Copies of the forms prescribed by 14 CFR part 43, 
section 43.9, for each major alteration to the airframe 
and currently installed components.

The owner/operator is required to retain the records of 
inspection until the work is repeated, or for 1 year after the 
work is performed. Most of the other records that include 
total times and current status of life-limited parts, overhaul 
times, and AD status must be retained and transferred with 
the aircraft when it is sold.

14 CFR part 43, part 43.15, requires that each person 
performing a 100-hour or annual inspection shall use a 
checklist while performing the inspection. The checklist 
may be one developed by the person, one provided by the 
manufacturer of the equipment being inspected, or one 
obtained from another source. The checklist must include the 
scope and detail of the items contained in part 43, Appendix D.

The inspection checklist provided by the manufacturer is 
the preferred one to use. The manufacturer separates the 
areas to inspect such as engine, cabin, wing, empennage 
and landing gear. They typically list Service Bulletins and 
Service Letters for specific areas of the aircraft and the 
appliances that are installed.
  
Initial run-up provides an assessment to the condition of the 
engine prior to performing the inspection. The run-up should 
include full power and idle rpm, magneto operation, including 
positive switch grounding, fuel mixture check, oil and fuel 
pressure, and cylinder head and oil temperatures. After the 
engine run, check it for fuel, oil, and hydraulic leaks. 

Following the checklist, the entire aircraft shall be opened 
by removing all necessary inspection plates, access doors, 
fairings, and cowling. The entire aircraft must then be cleaned 
to uncover hidden cracks or defects that may have been 
missed because of the dirt. 

Following in order and using the checklist visually inspect each 
item, or perform the checks or tests necessary to verify the 
condition of the component or system. Record discrepancies 
when they are found. The entire aircraft should be inspected 
and a list of discrepancies be presented to the owner. 

A typical inspection following a checklist, on a small single-
engine airplane may include in part, as applicable:

• The fuselage for damage, corrosion, and attachment 
of fittings, antennas, and lights; for “smoking rivets” 
especially in the landing gear area indicating the 
possibility of structural movement or hidden failure.

• The flight deck and cabin area for loose equipment 
that could foul the controls; seats and seat belts for 
defects; windows and windshields for deterioration; 
instruments for condition, markings, and operation; 
flight and engine controls for proper operation.

• The engine and attached components for visual 
evidence of leaks; studs and nuts for improper torque 
and obvious defects; engine mount and vibration 
dampeners for cracks, deterioration, and looseness; 
engine controls for defects, operation, and safetying; 
the internal engine for cylinder compression; spark 
plugs for operation; oil screens and filters for metal 
particles or foreign matter; exhaust stacks and mufflers 
for leaks, cracks, and missing hardware; cooling 
baffles for deterioration, damage, and missing seals; 
and engine cowling for cracks and defects.

• The landing gear group for condition and attachment; 
shock absorbing devices for leaks and fluid levels; 
retracting and locking mechanism for defects, damage, 
and operation; hydraulic lines for leakage; electrical 
system for chafing and switches for operation; wheels 
and bearings for condition; tires for wear and cuts; and 
brakes for condition and adjustment.

• The wing and center section assembly for condition, 
skin deterioration, distortion, structural failure, and 
attachment.

• The empennage assembly for condition, distortion, 
skin deterioration, evidence of failure (smoking 
rivets), secure attachment, and component operation 
and installation.

• The propeller group and system components for torque 
and proper safetying; the propeller for nicks, cracks, 
and oil leaks; the anti-icing devices for defects and 
operation; and the control mechanism for operation, 
mounting, and restricted movement.

• The radios and electronic equipment for improper 
installation and mounting; wiring and conduits for 
improper routing, insecure mounting, and obvious 


2-65

defects; bonding and shielding for installation and 
condition; and all antennas for condition, mounting, 
and operation. Additionally, if not already inspected 
and serviced, the main battery inspected for condition, 
mounting, corrosion, and electrical charge.

• Any and all installed miscellaneous items and 
components that are not otherwise covered by this 
listing for condition and operation. 

With the aircraft inspection checklist completed, the list 
of discrepancies should be transferred to the work order. 
As part of the annual and 100-hour inspections, the engine 
oil is drained and replaced because new filters and/or clean 
screens have been installed in the engine. The repairs are 
then completed and all fluid systems serviced.

Before approving the aircraft for return to service after 
the annual or 100-hour inspection, 14 CFR states that the 
engine must be run to determine satisfactory performance in 
accordance with the manufacturers recommendations. The 
run must include:

• Power output (static and idle rpm)

• Magnetos (for drop and switch ground)

• Fuel and oil pressure

• Cylinder and oil temperature

After the run, the engine is inspected for fluid leaks and the oil 
level is checked a final time before close up of the cowling.

With the aircraft inspection completed, all inspections plates, 
access doors, fairing and cowling that were removed, must 
be reinstalled. It is a good practice to visually check inside 
the inspection areas for tools, shop rags, etc., prior to close 
up. Using the checklist and discrepancy list to review areas 
that were repaired will help ensure the aircraft is properly 
returned to service.

Upon completion of the inspection, the records for each 
airframe, engine, propeller, and appliance must be signed off. 
The record entry in accordance with 14 CFR part 43, section 
43.11, must include the following information:

• The type inspection and a brief description of the 
extent of the inspection.

• The date of the inspection and aircraft total time in 
service.

• The signature, the certificate number, and kind 
of certificate held by the person approving or 
disapproving for return to service the aircraft, airframe, 
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, component part, 
or portions thereof.

• For the annual and 100-hour inspection, if the aircraft 
is found to be airworthy and approved for return to 
service, enter the following statement: “I certify that 
this aircraft has been inspected in accordance with a 
(insert type) inspection and was determined to be in 
airworthy condition.”

• If the aircraft is not approved for return to service 
because of necessary maintenance, noncompliance 
with applicable specifications, airworthiness 
directives, or other approved data, enter the following 
statement: “I certify that this aircraft has been 
inspected in accordance with a (insert type) inspection 
and a list of discrepancies and unairworthy items has 
been provided to the aircraft owner or operator.” 

   
If the owner or operator did not want the discrepancies and/
or unairworthy items repaired at the location where the 
inspection was accomplished, they may have the option of 
flying the aircraft to another location with a Special Flight 
Permit (Ferry Permit). An application for a Special Flight 
Permit can be made at the local FAA FSDO. 

Other Aircraft Inspection and Maintenance Programs
Aircraft operating under 14 CFR part 135, Commuter and On 
Demand, have additional rules for maintenance that must be 
followed beyond those in 14 CFR parts 43 and 91. 

14 CFR part 135, section 135.411 describes the applicable 
sections for maintaining aircraft that are type certificated for 
a passenger seating configuration, excluding any pilot seat, 
of nine seats or less, and which sections are applicable to 
maintaining aircraft with 10 or more passenger seats. The 
following sections apply to aircraft with nine seats or less:

• Section 135.415—requires each certificate holder to 
submit a Service Difficulty Report, whenever they 
have an occurrence, failure, malfunction, or defect in 
an aircraft concerning the list detailed in this section 
of the regulation. 

• Section 135.417—requires each certificate holder 
to mail or deliver a Mechanical Interruption Report, 
for occurrences in multi-engine aircraft, concerning 
unscheduled flight interruptions, and the number 
of propeller featherings in flight, as detailed in this 
section of the regulation. 

• Section 135.421—requires each certificate holder 
to comply with the manufacturer’s recommended 
maintenance programs, or a program approved by 
the FAA for each aircraft, engine, propeller, rotor, 
and each item of emergency required by 14 CFR part 
135. This section also details requirements for single-
engine IFR passenger-carrying operations.


2-66

• Section 135.422—this section applies to multi-engine 
airplanes and details requirements for Aging Airplane 
Inspections and Records review. It excludes airplanes 
in schedule operations between any point within the 
State of Alaska. 

Any certificated operator using aircraft with ten or more 
passenger seats must have the required organization 
and maintenance programs, along with competent and 
knowledgeable people to ensure a safe operation. Title 14 
of the CFR, sections 135.423 through 135.443 are numerous 
and complex, and compliance is required; however, they are 
not summarized in this handbook. It is the responsibility of 
the certificated operator to know and comply with these and 
all other applicable equirements of 14 CFR, and they should 
contact their local FAA FSDO for further guidance.

The approved aircraft inspection program (AAIP) is an 
FAA-approved inspection program for aircraft of nine or 
less passenger seats operated under 14 CFR part 135. The 
AAIP is an operator developed program tailored to their 
particular needs to satisfy aircraft inspection requirements. 
This program allows operators to develop procedures and 
time intervals for the accomplishment of inspection tasks in 
accordance with the needs of the aircraft, rather than repeat 
all the tasks at each 100-hour interval. 

The operator is responsible for the AAIP. The program must 
encompass the total aircraft; including all avionics equipment, 
emergency equipment, cargo provisions, etc. FAA Advisory 
Circular 135-10 (as revised) provides detailed guidance 
to develop an approved aircraft inspection program. The 
following is a summary, in part, of elements that the program 
should include:

• A schedule of individual tasks (inspections) or groups 
of tasks, as well as the frequency for performing those 
tasks.

• Work forms designating those tasks with a signoff 
provision for each. The forms may be developed by 
the operator or obtained from another source.

• Instructions for accomplishing each task. These 
tasks must satisfy 14 CFR part 43, section 43.13(a), 
regarding methods, techniques, practices, tools, and 
equipment. The instructions should include adequate 
information in a form suitable for use by the person 
performing the work.

• Provisions for operator-developed revisions to 
referenced instructions should be incorporated in the 
operator’s manual.

• A system for recording discrepancies and their 
correction.

• A means for accounting for work forms upon 
completion of the inspection. These forms are used 
to satisfy the requirements of 14 CFR part 91, section 
91.417, so they must be complete, legible, and 
identifiable as to the aircraft and specific inspection 
to which they relate.

• Accommodation for variations in equipment and 
configurations between aircraft in the fleet.

• Provisions for transferring an aircraft from another 
program to the AAIP. 

The development of the AAIP may come from one of the 
following sources:

• An adoption of an aircraft manufacturer’s inspection 
in its entirety. However, many aircraft manufacturers’ 
programs do not encompass avionics, emergency 
equipment, appliances, and related installations that 
must be incorporated into the AAIP. The inspection of 
these items and systems will require additions to the 
program to ensure they comply with the air carrier’s 
operation specifications and as applicable to 14 CFR. 

• A modified manufacturer’s program. The operator 
may modify a manufacturer’s inspection program 
to suit its needs. Modifications should be clearly 
identified and provide an equivalent level of safety 
to those in the manufacturer’s approved program.

• An operator-developed program. This type of program 
is developed in its entirety by the operator. It should 
include methods, techniques, practices, and standards 
necessary for proper accomplishment of the program.

• An existing progressive inspection program (14 CFR 
part 91.409(d)) may be used as a basis for the 
development of an AAIP.

As part of this inspection program, the FAA strongly 
recommends that a Corrosion Protection Control Program 
and a supplemental structural inspection type program be 
included.

A program revision procedure should be included so that an 
evaluation of any revision can be made by the operator prior 
to submitting them to the FAA for approval. 
   
Procedures for administering the program should be 
established. These should include: defining the duties and 
responsibilities for all personnel involved in the program, 
scheduling inspections, recording their accomplishment, and 
maintaining a file of completed work forms. 
 
The operator’s manual should include a section that clearly 
describes the complete program, including procedures 


2-67

for program scheduling, recording, and accountability 
for continuing accomplishment of the program. This 
section serves to facilitate administration of the program 
by the certificate holder and to direct its accomplishment 
by mechanics or repair stations. The operator’s manual 
should include instructions to accomplish the maintenance/
inspections tasks. It should also contain a list of the 
necessary tools and equipment needed to perform the 
maintenance and inspections.

The FAA FSDO will provide each operator with computer-
generated Operations Specifications when they approve the 
program.
   
Continuous Airworthiness Maintenance Program 
(CAMP)
The definition of maintenance in 14 CFR part 1 includes 
inspection. The inspection program required for 14 CFR 
part 121 and part 135 air carriers is part of the Continuous 
Airworthiness Maintenance Program (CAMP). CAMP is 
not required of every part 135 carrier; it depends on aircraft 
being operated. It is a complex program that requires an 
organization of experienced and knowledgeable aviation 
personnel to implement it. 

The FAA has developed an Advisory Circular, AC 120-16 (as 
revised) Air Carrier Maintenance Programs, which explains 
the background as well as the FAA regulatory requirements 
for these programs. The AC applies to air carriers subject to 
14 CFR parts 119, 121, and 135. For part 135, it applies only 
to aircraft type certificated with ten or more passenger seats.

Any person wanting to place their aircraft on this type of 
program should contact their local FAA FSDO for guidance. 

Title 14 CFR part 125, section 125.247, Inspection 
Programs and Maintenance
This regulation applies to airplanes having a seating capacity 
of 20 or more passengers or a maximum payload capacity 
of 6,000 pounds or more when the aircraft is not required 
to be operated under 14 CFR parts 121, 129, 135, and 137. 
Inspection programs which may be approved for use under 
this 14 CFR part include, but are not limited to:

1. A continuous inspection program which is part of a 
current continuous airworthiness program approved 
for use by a certificate holder under 14 CFR part 121 
or part 135;

2. Inspection programs currently recommended by 
the manufacturer of the airplane, airplane engines, 
propellers, appliances, or survival and emergency 
equipment; or

3. An inspection program developed by a certificate 
holder under 14 CFR part 125.

 The airplane subject to this part may not be operated 
unless:

• The replacement times for life-limited parts 
specified in the aircraft type certificate data 
sheets, or other documents approved by the FAA 
are complied with;

• Defects disclosed between inspections, or as 
a result of inspection, have been corrected in 
accordance with 14 CFR part 43; and

• The airplane, including airframe, aircraft 
engines, propellers, appliances, and survival and 
emergency equipment, and their component parts, 
is inspected in accordance with an inspection 
program approved by the FAA. These inspections 
must include at least the following:

○ Instructions, procedures and standards for 
the particular make and model of airplane, 
including tests and checks. The instructions 
and procedures must set forth in detail the 
parts and areas of the airframe, aircraft 
engines, propellers, appliances, and survival 
and emergency equipment required to be 
inspected.

○ A schedule for the performance of the 
inspections that must be performed under 
the program, expressed in terms of the time 
in service, calendar time, number of system 
operations, or any combination of these.

○ The person used to perform the inspections 
required by 14 CFR part 125, must be 
authorized to perform maintenance under 
14 CFR part 43. The airplane subject to 
part 125 may not be operated unless the 
installed engines have been maintained 
in accordance with the overhaul periods 
recommended by the manufacturer or a 
program approved by the FAA; the engine 
overhaul periods are specified in the 
inspection programs required by 14 CFR 
part 125, section 125.247.

Helicopter Inspections, Piston-Engine and Turbine-
Powered 
A piston-engine helicopter must be inspected in accordance 
with the scope and detail of 14 CFR part 43, Appendix D 
for an Annual Inspection. However, there are additional 
performance rules for inspections under 14 CFR part 43, 


2-68

section 43.15, requiring that each person performing an 
inspection under 14 CFR part 91 on a rotorcraft shall 
inspect these additional components in accordance with 
the maintenance manual or Instructions for Continued 
Airworthiness of the manufacturer concerned:

1. The drive shaft or similar systems

2. The main rotor transmission gear box for obvious 
defects

3. The main rotor and center section (or the equivalent 
area)

4. The auxiliary rotor

The operator of a turbine-powered helicopter can elect to have 
it inspected under 14 CFR part 91, section 91.409:

1. Annual inspection 

2. 100-hour inspection, when being used for compensation 

or hire.

3. A progressive inspection, when authorized by the 
FAA.

4. An inspection program listed under 14 CFR part 
91, section 91.409 (f), when selected by the owner/
operator and the selection is recorded in the aircraft 
maintenance records (14 CFR part 91, section 
91.409(e)).

When performing any of the above inspections, the additional 
performance rules under 14 CFR part 43, section 43.15, for 
rotorcraft must be complied with.

Light Sport Aircraft and Aircraft Certificated as 
Experimental 
Light sport aircraft and aircraft that are certificated in the 
experimental category are issued a Special Airworthiness 
Certificate by the FAA. Operating limitations are issued to 
these aircraft as a part of the Special Airworthiness Certificate 
that specify the required inspections and inspection intervals 
for the aircraft.  

Typically, the operating limitations issued to these aircraft 
require that a condition inspection be performed once 
every 12 months. If the aircraft is used for compensation 
or hire (e.g., towing a glider, flight training), then it must 
also be inspected each 100 hours. A condition inspection is 
equivalent to the scope and detail of an annual inspection, 
the requirements of which are outlined in 14 CFR part 43, 
Appendix D.

An A&P or an appropriately rated repair station can perform 
the condition  inspection on any of these aircraft. The 
FAA issues repairman certificates to individuals who are 
the builder of an amateur-built aircraft, which authorizes 
performance of the condition inspection. Additionally, 
repairman certificates can be issued to individuals for 
conducting inspections on light sport aircraft. There are two 
ratings available for light sport repairman certificate, each 
with different privileges as described in 14 CFR part 65, 
section 65.107, but both ratings authorize the repairman to 
conduct the annual condition inspection. 

The operating limitations issued to the aircraft also require 
that the condition inspection be recorded in the aircraft 
maintenance records. The following or similarly worded 
statement is used:  

“I certify that this aircraft has been inspected on [insert 
date] per the [insert either: scope and detail of 14 CFR part 
43, Appendix D; or manufacturer’s inspection procedures] 
and was found to be in a condition for safe operation.” The 
entry will include the aircraft’s total time-in-service (cycles 
if appropriate), and the name, signature, certificate number, 
and type of certificate held by the person performing the 
inspection.
 
 

